**Indian Ocean Fury \#5 – Hormuz Hoedown**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by AndrewJ July 2018</span>**

India and Pakistan both on the map. Uh-oh...

Edit: And the Sara's 90 miles away from its closest Tico. Never a good
feeling.

Edit 2: French heavy ASCM helicopters - neat\!

Here's a bit of AAR, midway through the first morning...

**THE SITUATION**

After the initial flight of forces from the Gulf, and the closure of the
Straits of Hormuz, I have been instructed to take control in the air,
re-open the straits, and recommence the transit of supertankers in and
out of the Gulf.

I have a small pack of tankers sheltered in the Gulf itself, and a much
larger group of them holding south in the Indian ocean, which must be
protected and escorted about their business. In order to do this, I have
an assortment of aircraft along the length of the Gulf, with varying
degrees of ammo shortage, some minesweepers sheltering in Oman, a single
SSN, an ASW group and the Saratoga group in the Indian Ocean, and two
sets of important logistical ships heading north to meet them.

Within 5 days I must have tanker traffic flowing through the Gulf again.

**THE PLAN**

My southern logistical ships are isolated, weakly defended, but very
important, particularly the cargo ship with the ordnance for my air
forces in the Gulf. While they’re unlikely to get attacked by air, subs
are a very real threat. Each of the groups is assigned a dedicated
patrol of either P-3s or S-3s to clear their path. The tankers loitering
in the Indian Ocean also get an S-3 patrol, although I question its
effectiveness given the large area they cover, and the little frigate
steams around the area to show the flag. It won’t have much other use.

The Sara will steam slowly north while its Tico rushes to catch up, and
the isolated Spruance moves over to join it from Pakistan. My aircraft
have plenty of range, so there’s no need to hurry the carrier into the
Gulf. After forming up the Sara will gradually head NW towards Oman,
which should give me a bit more clearance from anything Soviet coming
out of southern Iran or India. (Speaking of which, I intend to stay well
clear of Indian and Pakistani shores whenever possible.)

The ASW group will consolidate a little, and head towards the Gulf
hunting for subs en-route, and the SSN will work cautiously towards the
straits. The minesweepers will hold for the moment. The two warships up
in the Gulf are ordered to make very close barrier patrol with active
sonar, hoping to protect the tankers there from anything sneaking in
along the shore.

Airpower will begin with probing attacks at either end of the Gulf,
intending to provoke fights there and knock down as much of the
peripheral enemy air force as possible, as cheaply as possible. (My low
missile stocks are definitely a concern.) The Straits of Hormuz are very
heavily guarded, so I won’t tackle them immediately. Instead, I will try
and give myself freedom of maneuver, so when the time comes I can attack
unmolested. I’ll probably begin engaging targets in/around the straits
sometime on Day 2, and then begin clearing it on Day 3.

**NIGHT 1**

I’m the first to open hostilities, making probes against the weaker ends
of the Iranian air force. Sparrow-carrying F-18s from the Sara head
north with a jammer in attendance to tackle the Phantoms in the Chah
Bahar area (as well as getting a Badger hunting for my ships). At the
same time, I start probing out of Kuwait to engage aircraft from
Omidiyeh, and the F-16s do a very nice job against the F-5s loitering
there, closing in to use Sidewinders when possible. It’s also relatively
easy to beat up on the Phantoms operating out of Bushehr, without
expending large amounts of missiles. However, when the Mig-29s start
popping up things get a lot more difficult, so I have to ease off to
preserve my missile stocks. I don’t want to be out of ammo in the event
of an attack.

Down south, I pick up the emissions of another powerful airborne surface
search radar off the Indian coast, in the gap between the Sara and my
logistics ships. My initial impulse is to shoot it down immediately, but
then I consider that this could be an Indian airplane, so best to leave
it alone. As I’m congratulating myself on showing diplomatic restraint
more information comes in confirming that it really is a Soviet Badger,
so it does get shot down after all (two F-18s and a KA-6 tanker), but it
does raise the concern of where it came from. Are the Soviets operating
out of an Indian base?

The Iranians make the next move, using their F-14s to press towards my
coast of the Gulf, and by their courses it looks like they’re tracking
my valuable support aircraft. If they still have a Phoenix or two then
this could be a real problem for clumsy AWACS or ELINT planes. Their
aggressive actions come when many of my better fighters are recycling,
and my lesser planes don’t have the range to tackle them safely.
Fortunately, the belt of Patriot missiles is well placed to deal with
them as they press in, and the SAM gunners rack up a good score,
particularly the crew in Bahrain. Hopefully the missiles I’ve used up
here won’t be needed in the event of a Soviet missile attack.

After their F-14s are down, two of mine arrive, refuel, and then make an
afterburner dash across the Gulf to knock down their Mainstay with a
long range Phoenix shot. I would have willingly traded several fighters
for that target, but the Iranians are temporarily down, so my planes get
away with it unopposed.

As this goes on overhead an SSK surfaces in the Gulf, to the east of the
assembled tankers there, and is immediately spotted on radar. He’s far
enough offshore that he can’t see my ships, but his presence is alarming
all the same. He’s swiftly sunk by a helicopter before he can make his
escape.

My surface search radars have also picked up some isolated naval
contacts sitting motionless very close along the eastern Iranian coast.
Now that the Phantoms out of Chah Bahar seem to be down for the moment,
a British helicopter with Sea Skua and good night vision goes sneaking
in at wavetop level for a peek. The ship turns out to be a La
Combattante, and the helicopter sinks it with a barrage of missiles
before sneaking home again. With this information in hand, the others
are sunk over the course of the night by a combination of Harpoons and
LGBs.

My next move is a heavy strike against the airfields at Chah Bahar and
Jask, in order to secure the open end of the Gulf of Oman. The majority
of the attackers come from the Sara, but the Tornadoes and F-15Es also
fly in to contribute. I’d feared pop-up SAMs, but it looks like previous
fighting got rid of most of those, and the bombardment is unopposed. The
runways are cratered, ammo bunkers are destroyed, and aircraft in open
parking are eliminated. I don’t go after the hardened shelters, since it
would take too many bombs, but with the runways cratered any survivors
are trapped for the moment. I should have air control over this end of
Iran now, and the closest active airfield is Bandar Abbas. This should
greatly reduce the risks of air strikes on incoming tankers.

**DAY 1**

Shortly before dawn I start getting numerous airborne contacts deep in
central Iran, roughly in the Isfahan area. There are a dozen of them,
loitering in a tight orbit at very low speed. This can only mean one
thing: tankers\!

At first, I’m baffled about how I can even see that far, since none of
my radars can reach there. Looking around I see the alarming sight of
the Saudi E-3 almost half way across the Persian Gulf, en-route to my
tankers over the Gulf of Oman\! High command immediately directs the
Saudis to turn back, rather than make a one-plane overflight of Bandar
Abbas, and clarifies that they are not, repeat not, to seek further
refuelling from us.

Regardless of how it was spotted, a tanker track is too valuable a
target to ignore. It probably means an incoming bomber strike from
distant airfields is in the making, so I need to move quickly. A decent
force of my F-15s and F-16s launch out of Kuwait, intending to brush
aside the two fighters on CAP near Omidiyeh and proceed on a direct path
to the tankers. Mistake\! The two planes on CAP die as expected, but
swarms and swarms of Mig-29s come boiling up out of Omidiyeh, and the
north end of the Gulf soon becomes a massive dogfight. I’m outnumbered,
and I have to launch more and more planes from Kuwait to try and rescue
the situation. The Fulcrums are difficult targets, and it usually takes
multiple AMRAAMs to achieve a single hit, and soon I’m burnering in
fighters from Bahrain to try and break through.

I eventually win the fight, but most of my planes are heading home
Winchester, and the few that proceed don’t have full missile loadouts
any more. The first pilot to reach the tanker area gapes in amazement at
the large planes silhouetted against the bright horizon. They aren’t
tankers. They’re Bears\! Engaging as quickly as they can, my pilots
manage to achieve gun and missile hits, but the Bears are extremely
(some would say absurdly) tough, and many of them take multiple missile
hits and keep flying. The majority are shot down, but some manage to
make their escape despite gaping holes in their fuselage, and they fly
away deeper into north-east Iran.

Remember that bit about preserving precious missiles? Engaging as
cheaply as possible? Not here\! This engagement totally blew that plan
away. There are only 17 AMRAAMs left in all of Kuwait, and most of those
are on aircraft already. My F-16s are loaded Sidewinder heavy, and the
F-15 pilots are trying to remember how to use Sparrows. Any further
engagements with the Mig-29s will be on an even footing at best, or far
worse in the case of the F-16s. Hopefully I won’t have to do any
anti-missile duty, with one-target-at-a-time Sparrows. That supply ship
is going to be really important.

Out at sea, the Spruance leading the Sara group has picked up a few
submerged contacts using active sonar. They mostly turn out to be false
targets, but this morning one of them turns out to be a Victor, lurking
motionless below the layer, and very close to where the tankers will
eventually have to go. It’s sunk by helicopter. Meanwhile in the Gulf of
Oman, my creeping SSN picks up a passive contact, but unlike all the
other false contacts and fish, it’s only momentary, which makes me very
suspicious. Did something briefly run its engines? Was that a launch
transient? After several minutes of indecision, hoping for the contact
to re-emerge, my paranoia gets the best of me and I send a torpedo
downrange below the layer popping it up when it gets closer to the
contact. That gets a response\! The SSK tries to flee, but does not
escape.

My ships have all consolidated in their groups by now, and with them
comes increasingly concerning information about war preparations in
India and Pakistan. I’ve been monitoring the Indian May, flying up and
down its coast, as well as fighters and ASW helicopter radars. The
possibility of Russians coming at me from behind is alarming (where did
that Badger come from?), and the latest intel makes me even more
nervous. The replenishment group is ordered to angle further east, into
the tanker swarm and away from India, and I’m considering sending a CAP
way down south just in case.

The last thing I need is getting caught up in a regional hot war with a
capable force like India.

A bit more time, a bit more AAR...

**DAY 1 CONTINUED**

As the day continues, my air-forces conduct a variety of fighter sweeps
to engage isolated aircraft (ESM recon, jammers, weak CAP, etc) in the
enemy rear, and the targets are mostly gone by noon. A single-plane CAP
is set up over the tankers in the Indian Ocean, and recce Mirages scout
the Iranian coast of the Persian Gulf, looking at the lesser airports
and facilities there. The Bushehr defences are alert, and a pair of
medium range SAMs take a shot at the Mirage, forcing it to turn away
before it can get a good look at the area. My ESM also starts picking up
ground-based surface search radars near the straits, presumably from the
SSM coastal defence units which are supposed to be in the area, but my
attempt to sneak one of my little drones in for a look ends when it’s
shot down by a Mig-23.

Mid-morning my Mirages start making a major fighter sweep to engage
planes near Hormuz, flying along the Gulf from the west, and they become
embroiled in a massive fight with Mig-23s. The planes are nearly at
parity. I have a slight missile range advantage, but not a great one,
and my pilot skill is low, so it’s a struggle, and once again I find
myself pouring in more and more aircraft to rescue the situation,
including sending in my Sparrow-firing F-16s.

As all this is happening, my ESM planes loitering at high altitude up
near Kuwait start picking up more airborne surface search radars where
we saw the bombers before. Is it an actual incoming raid this time? The
F-15s launch out of Kuwait (going around the Omidiyeh CAP this time),
the F-16s with Sparrows are pulled away from the Hormuz fight before
they can get there (sorry Mirages\!), and a precious pair of F-16s with
AMRAAM are also launched as backup to guard a tanker, in the event of
emergencies. Fortunately, the skies are clear en-route to the bombers
(which turn out to be Blinders this time), and my fighters batter them
out of the sky with Sparrows and Sidewinders before returning home.

Back at Hormuz, the main wave of Migs has subsided, and some of my
Mirages are pursuing the retreating stragglers back towards Bandar
Abbas. Up to this point the SA-5 has taken one or two ineffective
long-range potshots, but now one of the SA-10s opens fire, and the
Mirages turn to flee, diving to the deck and hurtling across Qeshm
Island (the long one on the NW side of the straits) in an attempt to
dodge the shots. This works, but prompts two previously hidden SA-6s on
the island to open fire. Fortunately, they do this at the edge of their
envelope, and the Mirages manage to escape.

These new SAM threats may be a problem when it comes time to deal with
the boat swarm and mine clearing in the straits, and fortunately I can
get at them since they’re just beyond extreme SA-10 range. The F-16CGs
and Jaguars are sent to deal with them, with a combination of high
altitude HARMs and Mavericks, and then cluster bombs to finish them off.
When this round of strikes are done we’ve managed to destroy 2 and
damage 1 SA-6, and destroy one and damage one SA-8 at the east end of
the island. This is encouraging progress, but tackling the more modern
defences (SA-10/11/15) is going to be much tougher.

While this is happening the Exocet carrying helicopters try and make
their way into the fray, since the skies over the straits are empty at
the moment. Unfortunately, that doesn’t last long, and the helicopters
keep retiring and returning as they try and avoid the numerous enemy
reinforcements which keep dashing into the area. My F-16CG strikers are
put to work with their defensive AMRAAMs, and more F-16CGs with precious
AMRAAM loads are launched to afterburner in and provide support. Many of
the enemy F-4s take single missile hits, and promptly turn about and
return home in the safety of their SAM umbrella, where I can’t follow.
No doubt they’ll be back after a day or two of repairs. The helicopters
finally find a gap in the air cover, and manage to sink the destroyer
and a few of the small warships in the straits (plus one Boghammer by
accident), but the big cargo ships (presumably with arty on deck like
before) and the swarm of small craft remain un-molested for the moment.

This leaves me with the greater part of my land-based aircraft down for
reloading at the moment, and with even fewer AMRAAMs than before, so
hopefully the Iranians and Soviets don’t try anything for the next few
hours until we have a chance to recover. If they do, I may have to put a
lot of trust in my SAMs.

The situation is calm at sea. My replenishment group (with the nuclear
cruiser now in attendance) is now among the tankers loitering in the
Indian Ocean, and P-3s have begun to hunt along the route the tankers
will take. I expect to start moving up the tankers after dusk, once I’ve
had a bit more search time in the area. The Sara is near the tanker
destination area, and will continue to patrol slowly there, looking for
subs which may be lurking to ambush the arriving ships. I don’t think
the ASW group in the Gulf (TG Elliot) is covering enough area, so I’ve
split it in two, with a Spruance, short range AA, and long range AA ship
in each group. The air threat is hopefully reduced enough that the
weaker groups won’t be at risk. They’ll slowly patrol up the Gulf of
Oman in parallel, banging away on active sonar, and hoping that my recce
report of no SSMs on the Iranian shore here is actually correct. The SSN
continues to patrol cautiously, not wanting to get too far into the
straits for fear of mines.

No further reports from India and Pakistan so far. Fingers crossed for
restraint. Hopefully I’m not asked to intervene.

A little more AAR..

**AFTERNOON 1 & NIGHT 2**

As the afternoon draws on I start looking at the Bandar Abbas and
Straits of Hormuz, with an eye to a strike after dark. There are a large
number of high-grade SAMs concentrated in the area, which I will have to
deal with. ESM contacts have revealed four SA-10 sites, which are my
primary concern, and numerous shorter range SAMs, and there are
presumably another set of mobile SAMs lying hidden, similar to the SA-6s
on Qeshm Island. Although the ESM contacts give me the general area of
the SAM batteries, I don’t have precise targetable locations, and I need
them.

A direct overflight of the SAM sites with my Mirages or other
pod-carrying fighters would be suicidal, but I do have the U-2, with an
80-mile camera on it. Since the SA-10s only have a 40-mile range, I may
be able to get a good look at them. However, the U-2 is a very
vulnerable target, if left alone. Therefore, it is preceded by a flight
of 6 Mirages, which tackle the Mig and Phantom CAP which has reformed.
Once those are down the U-2 advances, escorted by an EA-6 flying
underneath to jam the SA-5 radar, and a pair of F-14s a few miles out on
each side to handle any sudden surprises. The U-2 flies over the straits
until it’s just out of range of the known SA-10 batteries, getting
superb pictures of the Boghammers below. Unfortunately, it gets nothing
on the well camouflaged SAMs. I’m not about to send the U-2 into the SAM
envelope, so it makes a quick scout of the Gulf of Oman, and then goes
home. The whole operation is a bust.

Meanwhile my SSN, patrolling E of the straits, picks up another very
quiet slow-moving target at close range, creeping along at 1 knot at the
standard 40 m shallow depth. Another SSK, proclaims the captain\! My sub
ducks under the layer, fires a torp, and then brings it up through the
layer as it approaches the target. Which is gone… Baffled (and a little
alarmed) the sub rises up above the layer to listen again. Still no
contact. Worried they made a dreadful mistake, and the reported contact
position was wrong, the captain orders an active sonar search. Still
nothing\! It takes several more minutes (as the torp runs out of fuel)
before contact is finally re-established, and the embarrassed captain
records the school of fish in his log.

Evening falls, and the tankers are ordered to begin moving closer to the
Gulf of Oman. My SSN puts a few long-range Harpoon shots into the last
of the Iranian destroyers, under cover of darkness. My strike aircraft
are finishing swapping loadouts to emphasize HARMs, SLAMs, ALARMs, and
other standoff munitions. Slow moving ECM planes and tankers start
lifting off to move to supporting positions. It’s time for the Bandar
Abbas strike to begin.

My primary objective for this strike is to destroy the SA-10s. My
secondary objective is to damage or destroy other SAMs. To enable this
Bandar Abbas will also be struck, mostly as a means to force the
defences to react, but I do not expect to completely disable it on this
first round of attacks. TLAMs will come through the mountains from the
NW. HARM and ALARM strikes will come from all directions around the
target. I want the enemy to spend lots of missiles trying to shoot down
the fast-moving ARMs. This will hopefully allow SLAMs, with their
optical sensor and man in the loop, to come over the mountains just
behind the TLAMs, and find and destroy the SA-10s. If those go down,
shorter range weapons (Walleyes, Mavericks, LGBs) will close in to
attempt to deal with the remaining defences.

The strike goes mostly as planned, although there is some struggling to
get aircraft in the right place at the right time, particularly the
heavily laden F-18s with SLAMs, which have to tank en-route, and then
fly around to the opposite side of the target from the carrier to make
their through-mountain approach. The heavy fighter escort proves
unnecessary (only one pair of Migs comes up, before the attack is fully
in place), which is a relief. When the SAMs open fire the ARMs reply,
coming in like the spokes of a wagon wheel. The lesser SAMs are targeted
with roughly one each, medium SAMs get two or three, and the SA-10s get
the bulk of the barrage, but for a while it looks like the Iranian
defences are going to stop them all. Only four HARMs survive to reach
their targets, killing an SA-8 and hitting two of the SA-10s, and then
the ALARMs (fired in bulk) manage to slightly damage another SA-10.

The first of the 45 TLAMs (the VLS Spruance’s entire stock) arrive
moments later. The initial 15 are directed at hangars and weather
shelters, and most of them are shot down by the remaining defences, so
they do minimal damage. However, the remainder are assigned 15 each to
the two runways, and they get through mostly intact, pummeling the
runways into rubble. In the meantime, the majority of the SLAMs have
reached their targets, completely destroying two of the SA-10s, and
rendering the other two combat ineffective. Unfortunately, I don’t bring
in my second wave of strike aircraft quickly enough, and by the time my
A-6s and F-15Es arrive the SA-11s have begun firing again. Most of my
Walleyes are shot down (despite intense jamming), and I can’t get close
enough to use LGBs effectively, so only one of the SA-11s and a couple
of lesser SAMs are destroyed.

The flight home is mostly uneventful, except that the damaged SA-6 on
Qeshm Island turns out to have repaired itself (something to bear in
mind in longer scenarios), and it takes a potshot at a passing F-16.
Fortunately, it misses, and there are some Mavericks nearby to deal with
it.

So the strike achieved its primary (SA-10s) and tertiary (airfield
damage) objectives, but did not fully accomplish its secondary objective
(lesser SAMs). It came very close, and I think even being 2 minutes
sooner with the Walleyes would have made all the difference. I should
have been right on the heels of the TLAMs. As it stands now, I will have
to re-attack, and the medium and short ranged SAMs will be completely
reloaded and ready for me again. I can’t simply ignore the airfield,
since the SSM batteries are sheltering under the SAMs there, and they
must be destroyed. This time I won’t have a 45 missile TLAM strike to
‘prime the pump’, and I’ve used up many of my ARMs, so I’ll probably
have to take it in stages. We shall see\!

Next stages…

**DAY 2**

The remainder of the night is quieter, with most of my aircraft flying
back to base to re-arm. Many of my lesser aircraft (the Mirages and
F-5s) are switched over to bomb loadouts, in preparation for tackling
the boat swarm in the straits when daylight comes. A few isolated
Iranian CAP aircraft are engaged, and a few TLAMs are used to strike
isolated surveillance radars.

When morning comes the CVBG is on station near the tanker assembly area,
where it will continue to patrol. The replenishment groups continue to
advance towards the Gulf, and the two ASW groups continue their slow
sweep further into the Gulf of Oman, where they find and eliminate
another SSK. (This one’s a solid active sonar contact – nothing fishy
about it.) The minesweeper group and associated patrol boats are ordered
to advance towards the straits (although not to enter them yet). The
Indian Ocean tankers continue to close in, but I’m getting more nervous
about their defencelessness. The initial briefing mentioned the
possibility of SSGNs out there, so I decide to increase the tanker CAP
to a pair of F-14s, in the hope of limiting the damage from a pop-up
Charlie or the like. (The Iranian fighter situation is calming, so I
have more fighters to spare.)

Bandar Abbas receives two strikes during the day, the first, from the
mainland, dealing with some of the peripheral SAMs, and the second, from
the carrier, finishing off the remaining SAMs immediately around the
airfield itself. With the SA-10s gone, and the positions of the other
SAMs already established, the strikes proceed without too much
difficulty. Once the SAMs are gone the exposed planes are bombed, local
docks are destroyed, and the coastal defence SSMs are hunted down and
killed. These ones were radiating, and thus were reasonably easy to
find. Hopefully there aren’t any more hidden ones elsewhere. Escorts of
the homeward-bound strikers returning to Kuwait take the time to engage
more of the CAP at Omidiyeh, which seems to be the only place the
Iranians are still flying at the moment.

The boat-swarm in the Straits of Hormuz is anchored around some large
freighters loaded with artillery and MANPADS, and these get engaged with
Exocets (courtesy of the big Puma helicopters) and some LGBs. The
attacks are never enough to sink the big ships outright, but they have
poor damage control, and they usually burn out and flood within a few
hours of being hit. The attack on the boat swarm itself is done
old-school, with lots and lots of iron bombs. The Mirages tote ‘airshow
loads’ that would be much too heavy for long-range strikes, but a dozen
bombs per plane starts to add up rapidly. The surviving drone from the
Tripoli loiters overhead to act as a FAC, and by mid-afternoon the
straits have been cleared.

Once opposition there is cleared the minesweeping helicopters enter the
area and begin their hunt, soon finding a dense field of mines on the E
side of the straits, which they begin to sweep.

**NIGHT 3**

The Indo-Pakistan conflict goes hot after dark, but we’re well out of
the area by now, and so far there are no calls for us to intervene.
Hopefully they’ll just clash indecisively, because if one of them starts
winning then the nuclear issue could be a very nasty problem.

My minesweepers arrive at the straits, and begin slowly sweeping the
eastern minefield, in an organised line-abreast pattern along the length
of the field. The objective of this formation is more to find the mines
(with overlapping sonar fields) than to sweep them. My helicopters swoop
in to provide rapid sweeping, without having to put the ships at risk.
As dawn approaches the sweepers are doubling back along the outer edges
of the field, looking for outliers, but I think it’s mostly clear. My
helicopters have also found a second field further in, just past the
center of the straits, running in a north-south direction. I’m wondering
if there’s a third field even further west, but so far I haven’t found
anything yet.

Extensive tanker support is used to allow a carrier strike on the
airfields at Bushehr, and then Shiraz. Bushehr is reasonably well
defended, with SA-11s and an SA-6 (plus the SA-5, which seems to be out
of ammo), and it’s wall-to-wall light flack down around the reactor. A
combination of HARM, Walleye, and my few remaining SLAMs break down the
SAM defences, and then LGBs shut the runways. Shiraz is not as well
defended (just some flack), so the runways quickly fall victim to LGBs,
and the F-15Es and Tornadoes do a good job on the large number of Su-24s
parked in the open.

I also need to conduct ASW operations inside the Persian Gulf, to
protect my exiting tankers, who will have to start moving soon. My two
warships in the Gulf are not great ASW platforms, which means the search
will have to fall to MPA. The Iranian Abu Musa island airfield has some
flack defences which might interfere with a low-flying sub hunter, so I
begin engaging those with Mavericks, intending to clear the island
before beginning patrols. In the meantime, the two warships start slowly
zig-zagging along the tankers’ expected path of travel. They won’t do
much, but it might help a bit.

As dawn approaches, my replenishment group has reached the carrier, and
UNREP operations will begin shortly, and the first of the incoming
tankers has reached its form-up area. The two ASW groups have swept the
majority of the Gulf of Oman, and are nearly at the Straits, and another
Spruance is proceeding into the center of the Gulf from the mouth. I’ve
had a few worrisome submerged contacts which show up briefly on
long-range VLAD sonobuoys, and then never get found again, so another
look couldn’t hurt.

**PLANS**

Since the tankers are nearing the Gulf of Oman I’d like to tell them to
proceed, but that would tell the ones in the Persian Gulf to begin
moving too. Since they’re much closer to the straits they’d get there
reasonably quickly. If there’s a third (western) minefield, then they
might hit it before I can clear it. So, we’ll have to hold, probably for
half a day, until I can confirm the minefield situation. I expect to
clear the eastern field by mid-morning, and the second (central?) field
will probably be safe by dusk, or shortly afterwards, at which point I
can give the “go”. That should leave me two days for transit, part of
which I can use to clear a third field (if present) before the tankers
reach it. (I wish I knew exactly what route the tankers would take, so I
could proof specific lanes, but these civilian tankers could go
anywhere.)

One thing that’s making me nervous is the possibility of some sort of
pop-up SSM attack on the transiting tankers when they are near the
straits. I can give them a decent CAP without too much difficulty, but I
think I’d like a good area-defence AA ship in there too. Ideally that
would mean a Tico, but I’m really reluctant to leave the carrier without
my only one. A combination of my nuclear cruiser and the Belknap may
make a reasonable substitute, so they will head for the straits to cover
the tankers passing through.

Here's the next bit.

**DAY 3 through DAY 4**

The next couple of days proceed with little opposition from the enemy.

The minesweeping helicopters go on a series of recce runs where I think
the third minefield might be, but they find nothing. By noon on Day 3 it
becomes apparent that there are only two minefields. The first one has
been completely swept, and the second one is well underway. Therefore,
the command is given to declare the straits open, and the tankers begin
getting underway.

My two warships in the Persian Gulf form up in the center of their
tankers to provide SAM cover, and a P-3 is sent to work the area in
front of them. One of my ASW groups (from the former TG Elliot) proceeds
through the straits to meet them, while the other monitors the other
side of the straits. The cruiser SAM group arrives to loiter in the
center of the straits to provide SAM cover there, while the SSN lurks
below, listening for any surprises sneaking in from the Bandar Abbas
direction. F-16CGs from Al Dhafra fly CAP over the straits, while F-14s
provide CAP for the tankers approaching from the Gulf of Oman. I’m not
sure there’s much else I can do to secure the situation. The first fast
tanker is just reaching the straits on Day 4, so the test will come
soon.

Further out, the Austral Rainbow has reached Oman to offload its
precious missiles, which will be sent to Al Dhafra. (Although I really
needed the munitions up in Kuwait. Al Dhafra was relatively well off.)
The Saratoga, still cruising in the mouth of the Gulf of Oman, has
completed unrep. False sub contacts and biologicals continue to pop up
here and there, but these are investigated and classified reasonably
quickly.

Follow-up strikes have been launched on Shiraz, and Bushehr, targeting
soft infrastructure (fuel tanks, hangars, etc.) and completely wrecking
the nuclear facilities. Abu Musa was cleared of flack defences. A-6s
also took the time to visit the two eastern-most airfields during the
night and dump heavy bomb loads on the runways again, just to foil any
attempts to repair them. (I’m sure there’s still some airplanes lurking
in the hardened shelters, and I wouldn’t want a sudden pop-up surprise
from a repaired runway.) I haven’t hit Omidiyeh yet, up by the tip of
the Persian Gulf, but I haven’t seen any planes from there for a day
now, and I’m not sure if it’s worth the stretch to attack it.

At this point it looks like it’s a matter of watching the tankers for
another day, and hoping I haven’t missed any mines. (And hoping nobody’s
sneaking in underwater to lay new ones.) We shall see how it goes.

THE REST... DAY 4 and 5

As the tankers proceed through the straits, it suddenly occurs to me
that I need to take care of them after they come out of the straits
too\! The first westbound tanker is making a beeline for Kish Island,
which is still occupied by flack defence troops. A hastily organized
strike bombs the defences, and then recce runs are sent up and down the
coast looking for any more enemy units. They find and destroy a cluster
of radars (sitting quietly without emitting), but nothing else of note.

As the clock ticks down, the tankers continue to transit. As dusk falls
on the last day, and I think all is well, I suddenly get the report of
Bear radars again\! Have I let down my guard too much? Is this attack
for real? The spread-out tankers would be very vulnerable to attack, and
most of them are beyond any CAP. F-15s race in to intercept from Kuwait,
but fortunately the Bears (just 3 of them, sporting fresh patches over
battle damage from the first day) are still in their holding pattern,
and they get shot down before they can do anything.

The scenario ends a few hours later, with all tankers having
successfully transited the straits.

This one has a nice live feel to it at the start, with numerous things
happening along the length of the Gulf, a long area of operation to
worry about, and interesting news reports coming in about other
developments. It gives me interesting choices about where to spend my
combat power. Try and defend the wide-spread tankers from a vague
submarine threat, or concentrate on specific military units?
