**Pacific Fury \#1 – Bolt from the Blue**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by AndrewJ April 2021</span>**

**SITUATION**

It looks like war is breaking out in Europe, and here off the coast of
Japan I am in charge of a small American carrier group gathering west of
Honshu. We’re a bit spread out, and our Leahy is still hurrying to catch
up after refueling. We’re being sent up through the Tsugaru Strait, to
rendezvous with a tanker which is coming across the Pacific to meet us.
The Russian war-machine is poised and ready in Vladivostok, 400 miles to
our west, which puts us well within range of any missile-carrying
bombers coming from the mainland. The area is crawling with merchantmen
and fishermen, and there are a pair of Soviet tattletales (one older DD,
one AGI) shadowing the carrier group. If anything happens, the enemy
already know where we are.

In addition to my somewhat dispersed carrier group, I have a pair of
SSNs. One old Sturgeon is N of the carrier group in mid-ocean, and a
newer 688 is lurking off Vladivostok. My incoming tanker, steaming
across the Pacific, is being escorted by a Knox, which should provide
effective ASW screening, and its lack of air defence shouldn’t be an
issue out there. There’s also a Perry (the Jarrett) up near the
rendezvous zone, in case anything’s lurking in wait. The Japanese also
have a series of destroyers posted along their west coast, on ASW
patrols.

I do have some useful land-based air cover, in the form of F-18s down
south, and F-16s up north, and the Japanese have their own air patrols
along the length of the islands. I even have some F-15s in distant
Okinawa, However, they’re not all on a war footing yet, nor are the ones
on my carrier, and it will take a few hours before everyone is up and
ready.

**PLAN**

AEW and ELINT/ESM /assets and maritime surveillance /assets are ordered to
begin sweeping the area immediately. Most will be operating west of
Japan, but one P-3 is sent east, towards our tanker group, in case some
sort of disguised Soviet ship is lurking piratically in the area.

The tanker group is to tighten formation, deke 20 miles off-course to
throw off any immediate pursuit or ambush, and then resume its transit
towards the rendezvous area.

The Jarrett, in our patrol area east of the straits, is ordered to sweep
into the mouth of the straits, before returning to guard the rendezvous
area.

My 688 SSN off Vladivostok is ordered to periscope depth to provide ESM
warning of air activity in the region, while the old Sturgeon SSN will
do its best to stay out of trouble in mid-ocean.

The carrier group is ordered to tighten up formation and head south
directly towards the Leahy at full speed, while the Leahy rushes north
to meet them. The combined group will adopt a tight anti-missile
formation and head for the coast, giving them more room to avoid Russian
threats, and making them easier to cover with land-based air. It will
then continue north along the coast as circumstances warrant.

**OPENING MOVES**

As my aircraft spread out, I start to get a better look at the overall
situation. There’s plenty of activity in Russia, where surveillance and
SAM radars are in evidence, along with the powerful emissions of Badger
reconnaissance aircraft. Not only have the Russians got me directly from
their tattletales, but they also have me on radar too. As alarming news
reports flow in from Europe, and the Defcon level starts ratcheting up,
I start getting more indications of Soviet air activity. More
surveillance planes start showing up, jammers begin to make an
appearance, and then fighters; first MiG-23s, then Su-27s, and even some
MiG-31s.

I had initially hoped to keep my fighters on the ground as long as
possible, but it’s becoming obvious that this won’t be an option much
longer, and my first patrols start heading west. The enemy recce planes
are actually closer to me than the enemy fighters, which seem to be
staying inshore for the moment, and I start to wonder if my best course
of action is to concentrate on them, hoping to rapidly poke the enemy’s
eyes out, rather than CAP-ing over the carrier or trying to tackle the
fighters. Accordingly, my first flights spread out, moving a couple
hundred miles west to threaten the Badgers.

To my annoyance, an enemy Badger also turns on its radar far out to the
east, coming in to have a look at my tanker group, which pretty much
scotches my chance of keeping undetected and dodging any ambushes. This
is actually rather worrying. I don’t think missile-carrying attackers
are likely (although if one Badger is there, why not another?), but this
guy could easily be cueing an SSGN, or something like that. I decide to
send one of my precious ready F-16s to intercept, and the Jarrett is
ordered to hurry east to meet them, to provide a modicum of air defence.

**FIRST BLOOD**

First to fire are actually the Japanese\! Their destroyers manage to get
contacts on a pair of probable subs in the western approaches to the
Tsugaru Strait, and they start to maneuver aggressively to engage.
Admiralty manages to wave them off in time, but the memo doesn’t get
through to their P-3s, who sink a Tango before anyone can stop them.
(Translation: I switched sides and adjusted the ROE for the destroyers’
ASW patrols, but forgot to do it for the P-3s. Ooops\!)

They’re heading for the second contact, when they get ordered to wave
off. I almost wish they had engaged, because now the second contact has
managed to throw off its trackers, and I’m not sure exactly where it has
gone. An S-3 is headed north to help out, but for the moment the contact
is elusive.

**LAST MOMENTS**

Diplomatic distinctions of who fired first probably don’t matter much at
this point. The recce planes seem to be moving further out to sea, the
line of jammers is firming up behind them, and fighter patrols are
moving out to join them. I’m getting intel reports of large formations
over Vladivostok, and when my AWACS starts getting hits on formations of
slow movers I can’t wait any longer. The last ready planes are scrambled
from my squadrons on-shore, and a few more carrier planes launch. I’ve
still got about 50% of my ready planes on-deck, but it can’t be long
until I’ll need them too.

I have not yet called for assistance from the Japanese, and my hope is
that I won’t need to. My carrier group is collected together and headed
for shore, and maybe, just maybe, we’re going to get out of this without
help.

**WAR\!**

Suddenly, AWACS reports supersonic sea-skimming missiles appearing in
mid-ocean. Oscar\! Moments later, a second one opens fire. Two streams
of missiles are headed for the carrier group, and a few more are headed
for the northern Japanese destroyers, which are essentially defenceless
against this particular threat.

Our response is immediate. Harpoons roar away across the waves, rapidly
sinking the pair of tattletales, and my dispersed line of fighters start
knocking down Badgers and recce Backfires, trying to kill as much of
their long-range radar recce as possible. Enemy fighters are ignored
wherever possible, and things go very well for the initial salvo, but
attempts to pursue the more distant enemy are foiled by their
long-ranged SAMs, and I’m forced to go diving to the deck. There are
still enemy radar planes up, and I don’t think I’ll get them all.

On the carrier, the deck crews work as fast as they can, launching every
fighter we have left. Half of them are directed to each of the incoming
streams of missiles. They certainly won’t be able to stop them all, but
my hope is that they can thin the lines enough for the SAMs to be able
to stop the rest. Reports are coming in of sabotage and attacks on the
mainland, but fortunately every land-based ready fighter I have is
already up.

The first of the missiles is hurtling towards the Japanese. Is there any
hope for them?

**NEXT MOVES**

Assuming I survive the double-Oscar attack, the question becomes what to
do next. So far, the (assumed) enemy bombers do not seem to have come
out to sea. Maybe, now that I have managed to knock down a number of
recce planes and sink the tattletales, the enemy no longer has a
reliable contact on me? That is my hope, but it may be a slender one.
I’ll continue to retire towards the coast and then head north, but
making the rendezvous as scheduled is entirely optional now. Hopefully
there aren’t too many subs in my path. And maybe my single F-16 will get
to that eastern Badger before it can summon a world of hate for my
lonely tanker? We shall see\!

**MISSILES INBOUND**

Is there hope for the Japanese? Alas, not for them. The massive
supersonic sea-skimmers hurtle in towards the ASW ships, who only have
guns to defend themselves, and my few F-16s in the region are out of
position to intervene. Three of the destroyers are torn to pieces by the
thundering blasts. The number of survivors is very small.

Down south, my fighters close in on the approaching missile streams,
firing every missile of their own, and even resorting to cannon-fire to
try and break up the attack. Three effective missiles get through from
the southern attack, and eight from the northern. Fortunately, the
missiles won’t arrive simultaneously. My carrier group energizes its
radars, aims its launchers west, and gets ready to defend itself.

The southern missiles clear the horizon, and we start shooting, and
shooting, and shooting. SAM after SAM misses completely, and I start to
wonder if the ASMs are going to fly right in and sink me without being
hit at all. The middle one and the tail one finally die, but the first
one plunges onward, inside minimum SAM range and past the heavy guns.
It’s only a final desperate Phalanx burst which finally puts it down,
raining missile fragments all over the fleet. The northern missiles
arrive a couple of minutes later, and this time the defence goes better.
Even though there are more missiles, they all get shot down before they
get to guns range.

The white-faced crews in the carrier group look at each other with
dismay. They came within seconds of losing a ship, and if the missile
streams had happened to arrive simultaneously, they would probably have
been launching rescue helicopters now. How well will they be able to
withstand a massed bomber attack?

**CENTRAL FIGHTING**

AWACS reports that the air picture looks bleak. There are swarms of
modern MiG-31s, and fast MiG-25s in the air now, to go with the
dangerous Su-27s and ubiquitous MiG-23s, and AWACS has contacts on at
least two dozen bomber-sized aircraft orbiting over Vladivostok. My 688
SSN, lurking at periscope depth to do ESM duty off Vladivostok, detects
the radars on incoming May ASW aircraft, and has to dive and clear the
area before its masts are detected, which deprives me of a source of
intel.

My pilots start trying to engage in the center, where a few
Phoenix-carrying F-14s are able to engage the MiG-31s with some hope of
success, covering the retreat of planes which had engaged the recce
aircraft and missiles earlier on. For a moment they manage to open a
hole in the center, but I have nothing left to exploit it with, and soon
another wave of heavy fighters pours in to fill the gap.

Now lone Tu-22s start showing up, firing cruise missiles at
infrastructure targets such as radars along the Japanese islands,
followed by flights of three making attacks on our airbases. The
Japanese fighters and SAMs make some efforts to intercept these
missiles, but they’re fast and hard to hit, and many get through.
Fortunately, their accuracy is not great, and the actual damage is
modest. My pilots even manage to catch one or two of the bombers in the
general fighting, but most return safely to base.

By this time the next wave of MiG-31s and other Russian fighters is
bearing down on us, forcing me into a general retreat. The carrier group
continues to run for the coast, heading for the shelter of the Japanese
fighters at Komatsu, and all my support aircraft fall back at full speed
towards the islands. The retreating AWACS gets a last look at the
colossal swarm of bombers over Vladivostok, while my ELINT planes hurry
away as best they can, hoping the Russians are more interested in
shooting fighters than them. Worst of all, I’ve got a huge stack of
defenceless planes in the carrier landing pattern, and MiG-31s are
speeding towards them at high supersonic dash.

Fortunately, the enemy are now coming so close to Japan that the
Japanese CAP (not the special action) starts moving to engage. It’s F-4s
vs MiG-31s, and the results are not in the Japanese favour. Still, the
brave pilots do manage to mess up the enemy formation, waste their
missiles, and achieve a few kills. This lets my last remaining fighters
get into the remains to kill one or two more, and that gives us the
breathing space to continue landing our fighters.

**THE NORTH**

Fighting isn’t confined to the center. Up north, near the Tsugaru
Strait, my S-3 arrives in the area where the other sub contact was and
starts hunting. A lucky contact with an active buoy locates what turns
out to be a Kilo, and a couple of Mk50s sink the stealthy sub. The S-3
then heads east to lay a line of buoys through the strait, looking for
any intruders there. (Hmmm. Straits + subs = mines? Will have to
remember that if the carrier gets up there.)

Japanese ASW planes are also active in the area, and one of their P-3s
decides now is the perfect time to go hunting for the northern Oscar,
which is half-way to Russia\! This provokes an angry response from the
squadron of MiG-25s loitering there, who swoop in towards the foolish
plane. Executive orders are issued telling the pilot to return home
immediately, and my last F-16 manages to kill the two leading MiGs with
AMRAAM shots, but the rest are still in hot pursuit. Freshly launched
F-16s are burnering towards them, but they probably won’t make it in
time. Prospects for the P-3 are poor.

Meanwhile, another F-16 has finally arrived over the tanker group out in
the Pacific, shooting down the Badger that’s been tracking my vulnerable
ships. Unfortunately, he’s only got a few minutes of fuel on station, so
after hunting around briefly he has to go home again. The two ships are
on their own again.

**SITREP**

It’s 1345Z now, and the command staff are trying to put together a
picture of the situation.

My initial fighter flights are either retreating or landing now, and are
in the process of quickly re-arming. Fortunately, the next wave of
fighters is already lifting off. Four fresh F-14s (2 Phoenix each) are
arriving on station, four more F-18s are on the way from Iwakuni in the
south, and four more F-16s from Misawa in the north. I’ve also got four
F-15s flying in from Okinawa with a tanker, and four more to follow.
They’ll refuel, fight, and then base out of Iwakuni for the moment. I
won’t get any more carrier aircraft for over an hour, but some
additional F-16s should be trickling in.

The Russian bombers don’t seem to be making a move yet. My AWACS is
probing cautiously in their direction again, and getting glimpses of
them over their coast. Unfortunately, there are plenty of new recce
planes flying my way, and this time they’re embedded in the existing
fighter screen, so I can’t be confident I’ll be able to shoot them down.
If the recce planes do manage to get a good contact on me, then I expect
they’ll engage. (I’m keeping my special action in reserve for these
guys.)

We’ve spotted another AGI in the center, half-way to Vladivostok and
well inside Russian fighter cover. There’s no way to get at it, and it
doesn’t seem to be doing any harm, so it’s not a concern at the moment.
There hasn’t been any sign of major fleet units yet, which is good. My
688 is creeping a little closer to Vladivostok, and may be able to
intercept if something shows up. My Sturgeon has been ordered to hunt
the northern Oscar, but he’s actually outclassed by the enemy, so that
may turn out to be a bad decision.

Meanwhile, my carrier continues to head for Komatsu, desperate for
distance from the foe. Unfortunately, this is going south-east, and I’m
supposed to be going north-east to rendezvous with my tanker. Do I risk
turning, or continue to safety?

Decisions must be made\!

The fight continues…

**TSUGARU STRAITS**

MiG-25s are hurtling in towards the hapless Japanese P-3 as it flees
east towards the straits, and F-16s from Misawa dash in on afterburner,
but they’re still over 50 miles away when the MiGs reach the plane – and
fly right past, ignoring it. They’re going for my S-3 which is
patrolling the straits; the buggers in the P-3 have led the enemy right
to me\! Fortunately, the extra distance is just enough for the F-16s to
make it in, and they manage to knock down the enemy before they can do
any damage.

Meanwhile, the ASW aircraft in the area are starting to report submerged
contacts in the straits. So far they all seem to be false, but this
would be a really bad place to bump into a sub, so we keep looking for
more.

**ADVANCE OF THE BOMBERS**

While the fighters slash at each other, the radar operators on the E-2s
and E-3s start seeing coordinated movements among the enemy aircraft.
The main bomber strike, well over 30 of them, is leaving its marshalling
area over Vladivostok, and seems to be headed due east for Hokkaido.
There’s also a group of eight headed further south, plus a couple of
groups of five or six smaller contacts between them. They’re screened by
numerous MiG-25s in the north, and MiG-31s in the center, along with a
mix of Su-27s and MiG-23s.

My fighters in the center struggle against the MiG-31s, but we’re almost
completely out of planes, and for the moment we can’t make any headway
towards the incoming southern bombers. Backfires are still doing land
attack strikes. In the south F-18s from Iwakuni almost catch them in the
act, but they launch moments before the fighters arrive, and Iwakuni
gets rocked by a series of impacts as the supersonic cruise missiles
detonate throughout the base. Meanwhile, another heavy anti-shipping
missile speeds in from somewhere in the confusion and sinks the last of
the northern Japanese destroyers. (I’m glad the Jarrett, my Perry on the
far side of the straits, is steaming east to meet the tanker, instead of
hanging around for the bombers to arrive.)

The few planes I can scrape up keep trying to get at the bombers. Some
F-16s from Misawa dive into the pack up north, which seem to be forming
up off the coast of Hokkaido, and they manage to get some of the
Badgers, and even a couple of Backfires, before the perpetual
interference of the MiG-25s drives my pilots away again. The heavy
Russian fighters pursue us south, forcing all my ASW and AEW planes to
flee, until the Nike battery on Hokkaido manages to shoot them down. The
last of the carrier-based F-18s and F-14s keep trying to get at the
bombers in the center, and they finally get a break when some Hornets
from Iwakuni distract the MiG-31s, leading them away to the south-west.
That doesn’t go perfectly for the F-18s, but my other fighters manage to
maul the 8 Badgers in the center, shooting some down and sending the
others home with damage.

**CONFUSION AMONG THE BOMBERS**

Suddenly, we get radar reports that the small groups of half a dozen
planes (now assessed to be Su-24s – possibly ARM carriers?) are turning
back towards their to bases. A few minutes later a stream of contacts is
seen leaving the loitering northern bombers. The Backfires are
retreating without firing a shot\!

The admiral decides that this is a crucial turning point. The carrier
group is currently fleeing south for the shelter of the Komatsu airbase,
which is only 43 miles away now. But if the Su-24s are retiring, the
central bombers are gone, and the northern Backfires are already on the
way home, then the threat is effectively over. The moment of decision
has come. The carrier group is ordered to turn NE and head for the
straits at full speed\!

The problem is, the admiral has got it wrong. What he’s seeing in the
north are a stream of unidentified Su-24s going home, not Backfires. The
Backfires are still there. They’ve finally got the go-code, and all the
Badgers and Backfires turn south to attack. The admiral is steaming
directly towards them.

**CHARGE OF THE HEAVY BRIGADE**

The bombers advance, 12 Backfires on the east, and 8 Badgers on the
west. The Backfires are coming right down the coast, well within range
of the Nike battery, but it doesn’t shoot. It’s hurriedly reloading its
heavy missiles after engaging MiG-25s earlier, but nothing is on the
rails now, and the bombers fly past unmolested. The bomber crews are
confident, knowing they’ve got half a dozen MiG-25s ready to guard them,
and they press on southwards.

Unfortunately for them, the MiG-25s are distracted, and are chasing away
the remains of my previous attacks. Four fresh F-16s arrive on
afterburner from Misawa, and tear into the bombers unopposed. The
carnage is fearful. Most are shot down outright, and only four survive
to stagger home with wounds and gashes in their airframes.

The Badgers press on, and this time I’ve got almost nothing to oppose
them. A few tired F-14s make it in with only a Sidewinder or two left,
and one F-16 manages to get a couple of hits with AMRAAMs, but then the
shame-faced MiG-25s get back on station, and none of my planes can get
past them. The bombers survive to launch six missiles at the carrier
group.

These missiles are big and fast, but unlike the missiles from the
Oscars, these are high-altitude weapons, and my SAM operators can see
them coming. The Leahy starts opening fire while they’re still 100 miles
away, and the deliberate SAM fire gradually knocks them down. None of
them make it to the group, but it takes another 19 of my SAMs to do it,
and that’s an expenditure I’d rather not have made.

**THE OTHER SIDE OF JAPAN**

Things are not going so well on the other side of the islands, where the
Brewton, a Knox-class frigate, is escorting the tanker USNS Pacos
towards Japan. They’re all feeling a lot more confident, now that the
Badger that was trailing them has been shot down, and the Brewton is
sprinting and drifting ahead, banging away on its active sonar in case
there are any SSs lurking in their path. That’s when a pair of anti-ship
missiles erupt out of the first convergence zone in a pillar of smoke
and start heading in at 600 knots.

The ready chopper scrambles immediately, dashing towards the smoke plume
at full throttle, while the ASROC fires a futile BOL shot towards the
enemy in the faint hope of distracting him or making him turn away. Both
ships turn to port, accelerating to the tanker’s top speed, hoping to
dodge the missiles somehow, but it doesn’t work. The Brewton opens fire
with its main gun, and then the CIWS starts roaring, and in a hail of
bullets manages to shoot down both incoming missiles.

A second pair of missiles bursts out of the ocean, and this time it
looks like the enemy captain has misjudged his shot. Both missiles pass
slightly ahead of the ships and fly off into the darkness, leaving us
completely unscathed. The third pair follows shortly after that, but
this time they’re on target, and both of them lock on to the Brewton.
The main gun fires valiantly, but the silent CIWS is out of ammunition.
The pilot on the Brewton’s Seasprite helicopter sees the skies light up
with a horrible flash as the missiles tear the stern off their ship, and
send it plunging to the seafloor.

They don’t have time to think about what’s happened, and moments later
their first sonobuoys are dropping around the location of the missile
launches. The contact is immediate, and the torpedo drops perfectly on
the shallow contact. There’s a muffled thump, the sea heaves, and the
Charlie joins the shattered Brewton on its voyage to the abyssal mud
below.

A frigate for an SSGN? Probably a roughly even trade, but one I’d prefer
not to make. The helicopter lands on the Pacos, which sets course for
the rendezvous again. It’s a long way to go alone. There’s a P-3 already
en-route to patrol ahead of the Pacos, and my Perry is ordered to go to
flank speed to escort the tanker as soon as possible. Of course, that’s
when someone tries to torpedo the Perry…

‘Counterfire\!’ yells the captain, and a spread of two Mk46s is launched
down the torpedo bearing, while the ship heels over in a maximum
performance turn away from the threat. The helicopter’s leaping off the
deck, and as it thunders away the Perry turns again, hoping that the
enemy sub has turned away to dodge our torps, and thus lost contact. It
works, and the torpedoes continue blindly on their path and away from
the ship. The helicopter is on station almost immediately, and quickly
picks up the sound of the SSN running north away from our shots. He can
probably outrun them, but he can’t outrun the helicopter, and two
torpedoes add a Victor to the ocean floor.

**ONGOING ACTIVITY**

The F-15s which set out from Kadena start arriving over Japan by this
point, and soon refuel and start engaging the Su-27s, which form the
majority of the enemy fighter screen now. As their patrols get forced
back my pilots are able to kill a few more recce planes, which is a
relief. Best progress is made in the western half of the theatre, and
some of my planes even manage to work their way up the Korean coast and
pick off a couple of the jammers before running away from SAMs. It
doesn’t all go perfectly; one Eagle pilot confidently makes a head-on
attack on a silent ESM Badger, only to find it’s an ESM Fencer. He only
has time to gape briefly before the Aphid rips off his wingtip, but
fortunately Aphids are small, Eagles are tough, and he manages to limp
home safely.

Out at sea, the Japanese SSK Harushio has actually managed to get brief
a CZ contact on the northern Oscar. (The Sturgeon, also headed for the
area, doesn’t have a clue.) Unfortunately, he’s also flattened his
battery, forcing him to snorkel. That’s probably what brings a May out
from the safety of its SAM umbrella, so I send out a pair of F-14s,
escorted by F-18s, to try and reach past nearby fighters and shoot it
down. Before they can get there, however, a passing F-15 manages to
sneak through a gap and snipe their kill. Go Air Force\!

**LOGISTICAL ITEMS AND PLANNING**

My Eagles are going to base out of Iwakuni, for the moment, but I’m
actually going to send my plane-load of AMRAAMs from Guam up to Misawa
instead. The F-16s there have no more AMRAAMs in the magazines at all,
so they need them more urgently than the planes at Iwakuni. The plane
should arrive in about three and a half hours, so we need to be careful
until then.

The carrier’s also starting to feel the pinch too. We’ve actually got
plenty of Phoenixes in storage, but only 21 Sparrows left. This will
start putting limits on operations if there’s another heavy strike
before we can resupply.

Given the ready time for heavy bombers, I don’t expect a return visit
from them before I get to the straits. (Unless they have another
squadron or two which hasn’t launched yet.) The Su-24s could be a
problem sooner, especially as we move closer to the straits where the
distance to the mainland is shorter. The carrier group will stay
reasonably close to the shore as it moves north, keeping a careful eye
out for submarines. As we get to the straits the Perry will transition
to the lead and try to use its mine-avoidance sonar to check for hidden
hazards.

I’m also concerned by civilian traffic. My ESM operators have pointed
out some anomalies in their radar transmissions, so I’ll try to stay
away from ships with more powerful radars. Unfortunately, there are some
right in the straits. Paranoia? Perhaps. Let’s call it ‘justifiable
caution’ instead.

**BEFORE DAWN**

In the early hours of the morning, AWACS suddenly detects another
vampire coming from the location of the northern Oscar. Missile alerts
sound throughout the fleet, and for a baffled moment we’re left
wondering if the Oscar held a few shots back, somehow reloaded (an
undetected supply ship?), or if there might be a third one out there?
The truth sinks in a moment later. The Oscar has detected the
snorkelling Harushio and opened fire with an SS-N-16.

The startled Harushio fires a spread towards the Oscar, and turns to
run, but there’s little hope, and she’s dead moments later. The nearby
Sturgeon hears all the commotion, and finally detects the Oscar in the
first CZ as it turns to run away from the torpedoes. Unfortunately, the
torpedoes never find a target, and the Sturgeon soon loses the contact
as the Oscar leaves the CZ. I’d love to go hunting here with a P-3, but
it’s too close to enemy airbases and SAMs to risk.

Meanwhile, assorted air-to-air skirmishing happens over the subs and
along the front, as my planes shoot down a mix of fighters, recce
planes, and another May trying to hunt the subs. For a while I think I
have the enemy down, but after a pause their fighters start to appear in
strength again. More MiG-25s, then MiG-23s and a few Su-27s interfere
with my operations, and I end up devoting significant fighter strength
to eliminate these patrols.

**UNDERWATER**

My Sturgeon, having lost the contact on the evading Oscar, starts
creeping slowly towards the area where it had been spotted initially.
Cautiously rising into the surface duct, it detects the Oscar, back in
its initial patrol zone, but still too far away to shoot. Another duck
and rise puts us at about 13 miles, the very limits of the kinematic
no-escape zone, so the Sturgeon fires two shots at the big SSGN.

It takes a couple of minutes for the Oscar to detect the incoming torps,
and then it turns to run, which is fine for me, since that means his
chances to counter-detect me are remote. But what I hadn’t considered
was that the Oscar quickly drew away from me, out of direct-path
detection, and vanished into the blind zone. My torps kept going in a
straight line, outrunning their wire limit, so I couldn’t hear through
their seeker heads either. Eventually, just before the predicted end of
run, there is one faint distant boom. Was that a kill? A wound? An
impact on a decoy? The Sturgeon searches the region quietly for the next
few hours, but no sign of the Oscar is found.

My ASW aircraft are having fun too. A left-over VLAD sonobuoy, 90 nm
behind the carrier, picks up a northbound SSN, allowing an S-3 to hurry
over and put a pair of Mk50s into a Victor. Evidently, the carrier had
passed nearby, and he hadn’t quite been able to make the intercept.

Good fortune also comes to my 688, the USS Buffalo, which has been
hanging out over the sea-mount 70 miles south of Vladivostok, waiting
for anything to come in or out of the port. Its sonar operator gradually
picks up a submerged contact and classifies it as an SSGN. It’s the
other Oscar, presumably headed for Vladivostok to reload\! The Buffalo
takes a bearing, goes into the layer, and starts creeping towards the
enemy.

One thing the captain of the Buffalo does not appreciate, is that he’s
under the protection of the carrier. Now that the fighters have been
driven off (for the moment) F-14s have been operating out here with
tanker support. Loitering outside SAM range, they’ve been using
Phoenixes to reach in and kill the Mays. Two of them have been shot down
in the last couple of hours (plus two earlier near the
Harushio/Sturgeon), and this has probably helped the Buffalo stay alive.

An hour and a half later the Buffalo very cautiously comes up to look
around, and hears nothing. At first it seems like it was a bad decision
to break contact. Maybe the Oscar changed course in the meantime? But
then the Oscar’s sound signature emerges, eight miles away, just over
the layer. The Buffalo goes back under the layer, and fires two
torpedoes. This time there’s no doubt. The Oscar tries to run but is hit
and sunk in fine style. The Buffalo then turns and heads north,
intending to patrol just off the edge of the continental shelf, looking
for ships coming from Vladivostok.

**DAWN STRIKE**

Dawn comes with a resurgence of Soviet air activity. Multiple planes are
taking off from Vladivostok, all headed directly for the carrier. Intel
estimates that they are probably Fencers. Multiple scrambles happen
throughout the region, with extra jammers and tankers going up, a mix of
fighters launching from Misawa and the carrier, and some F-15s coming up
from Iwakuni to act as a backstop.

The attack strength caps at 15, and fortunately the attack is not
supported by fighters. The F-16s (confident that their magazines are
full of freshly unloaded AMRAAMs) tear into the unprotected Su-24s, and
eliminate them all shortly after they leave the cover of their
shore-based SAMs.

**PASSAGE OF THE STRAITS**

As the carrier group approaches the straits it switches into anti-mine
formation (line ahead, with the carrier second from last in the line),
in case an undetected submarine or covert cargo ship has left any
surprises in our path. The carrier group’s Perry, the USS Vandegrift,
which is equipped with a mine-detection sonar, is sent further ahead to
try and proof the route. Unfortunately, we don’t have time to test the
entire passage at a cautious 5 knots, so we have to adopt a riskier
‘spot-check’ method, sprinting and drifting while the carrier group
follows at a steady pace.

There’s a sudden surge of alarm when a moving goblin is detected in the
rendezvous zone, but thankfully it turns out to be nothing more than
fish. The transit is tense, but uneventful, and the ships make it
through unscathed. (Although I’m sure Soviet spies are lining the
shores, happily telephoning spotting reports back to their handlers.)

Meanwhile, the USS Jarrett has met up with the tanker Pacos, and is
escorting it back to the rendezvous zone under the watchful eye of the
orbiting P-3.

**ARRIVAL ON-STATION**

Once it’s clear of the straits, the carrier group proceeds to the
rendezvous zone, and patrols quietly until the tanker arrives a couple
of hours before the deadline.

Airbase crews are busy putting out the last of the fires, bulldozing
away debris, and trying to clear away the damage from the missile
strikes.

In one final act of bravado, some impertinent pilots convince the staff
to let them sneak an A-6 into the enemy waters, staying below SAM cover,
to put a pair of 2,000 lb LGBs into that AGI that’s been lurking 80
miles off the Soviet coast. The lone heroes (plus the four escorting
F-16s, the jammer, the AWACS, the ESM plane, and the reserve tanker)
carry out the attack in fine style, bringing a long and viciously fought
day to a fine end.

**IMPRESSIONS**

Woo\! A nice big in-your face attack, with all sorts of enemy, and not
enough resources to deal with them. Intense, and very enjoyable\!

You’re going to be in big trouble if you stay spread out. You’ve got to
gather in tight and run like heck for shelter, and if you haven’t poked
the enemy’s eyes out quickly then things could go very badly. I came
within a hair of calling for the extra Japanese CAP several times (and
flying them myself, not letting the AI do it). This is a very
micro-friendly scenario. If you’re flying your fighters with missions or
leaving your SAMs on auto, then you’re probably going to take heavy
casualties.

I’m not sure how well I could have withstood the entire bomber attack.
If they had all managed to focus on the carrier at the same time, I
think multiple ships would have been underwater, even with the Japanese
assistance. So, this is a win on a technicality. If the bombers had
worked as intended this would probably have been a lot closer to a draw.

I definitely enjoyed the chance to sneak and be snuck by the subs. The
twin Oscars were nasty, but the Charlie attack out of the CZ was
classic\! That’s why these SSGNs would have been such a game-changer,
when they showed up in the seventies, compared with the risks of closing
to torpedo range. It’s so rare to see it work from the AI side in
Command, and it was a real pleasure to be sunk by it here. Plus having
the chance to cut off subs returning home for reloads, and nearly
getting ganked while running recklessly to help the tanker. What’s not
to like?

Thanks again for these massive and challenging scenarios\!
