**Mediterranean Fury 1: The Road to Byzantium.**

13 Feb 1994, 1215 Zulu, 1415 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf1\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.66111in" alt="Russian Navy Conducts First Black Sea Supersonic Cruise Missile Test - The Moscow Times" />

You are the Commander of the South Wester Direction HQ in Vinnitsa in
Central Ukraine. You report directly to the Soviet High Command in
Moscow and have many responsibilities; however, today in the opening
moments of the war you have one focus – Turkey.

You’ve been aware of the upcoming campaign for some weeks now, and your
key staff for the past month, but your subordinate commanders have only
had a week to prepare, and the formations involved were only notified in
the past days. Division commanders were told yesterday, and soldiers
were being rounded up even now, minutes before the fighting begins.

You need to be in Moscow tonight to brief the President, so your deputy
is now at Yalta taking personal charge of the operation. His job, if not
his life, depends on seizing the Bosporus in the next 48 hours – then
reinforced by mechanized forces from the 32<sup>nd</sup> Army Corps
(Crimea Corps), supported by the 24th Air Army and the Black Sea Fleet –
the Dardanelles within the week.

There are many supporting activities which will be exposed as required
but rest assured – you are not alone in this fight. Even now the wheels
are in motion to help you achieve what many have tried and failed in the
past.

Take your hammer and bang on the door – the Russians are coming!

***Scenario Name: Catherine the Great’s longest serving consort, Prince
Potemkin, after securing control of the
[Crimea](https://erenow.net/biographies/catherinethegreat/67.php) in the
1780’s erected an arch over the highway leading to the Balkans with the
inscription: “This is the road to Byzantium,” provocatively reminding
the empress of the enduring Russian ambition to control access to the
Black Sea and be the successor to the Eastern Roman Empire. Once again
Russia is using the Crimea as a springboard to seize the Bosporus and
Dardanelles – once more the road is traveled***

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf1\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.02639in;height:9in" alt="A picture containing mountain, nature, valley, outdoor Description automatically generated" />

**<u>Mediterranean Fury \#1</u>** is a large and intense scenario. The
player has strategic decisions to make which will affect the tactical
outcomes of play. After gaining air and sea superiority over the Black
Sea, the invasion of Turkey takes center stage. The Turkish response is
hampered by an attempted, and possibly successful coup as well as some
other intrigues which have been occurring over the past months.

Turkey is not alone however, however their long-mistrusted allies, the
Greeks have been subjected so similar tactics by the Soviets. The
Americans are sure to respond, but in what way?

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf1\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" alt="A picture containing grass, outdoor, plane, sky Description automatically generated" />
