**Northern Fury â€“ BUFF Stampede**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Feb 2016</u>**

I finally had a chance to try this one out. I think my approach was
reasonably conventional.

After some initial sniffing around with the RC-135, TR-1, and P-3
(goodbye AGI!) I decided to use two of my TLAM allowance to remove the
central surveillance radar and provoke the local radars to illuminate,
and send pairs of the remainder to try and mess up the small southern
island airport and the two western-most small airports on the N side of
Iceland. This destroyed a few aircraft on the ground, and slowed down
launching a little, but didn't completely shut them down. The
surveillance radar died, and my sensor guys went to work as local radars
turned on. (The sub had a peaceful voyage thereafter.)

After building up a better ELINT picture of what was going on, my first
flights of F-16s and EF-111s approached silently under full EMCON, while
the B-2 snuck in over the bay to drop its bombs on the Reykjavik
runways. This was a complete success, and my jammers and F-16s lit up to
cover the B-2's retreat and deal with the fighters that came charging up
out of Keflavik.

The Keflavik runways were supposed to be shut by CALCMs around the same
time, but this was a poor choice, as a lot of the CALCMs got shot down
by ZSUs, and their blast-frag warheads (although powerful), weren't
optimal for attacking runways. Some damage was done, but the runways
stayed open. (The CALCM toting B-52s hung around in the background
acting as jamming support for the remainder of the operation.)

With the B-2 safely out of the way the Greenland SEAD wave came in, as a
dogfight was developing in the Kef/Ryk area. The F-18s' long-range
Sparrows were supposed to be a useful counter to AA-10-Cs, by shooting
from the security of my jamming screen, but the Russian ground based
jammers kept hampering things so it didn't go quite as smoothly as
desired. Nonetheless, with half their local fighters trapped on the
ground in Ryk, we were able to gain the upper hand in this area, and
then knock down most of the better SHORADS with HARMs.

At this point we were able to move in aircraft equipped with good ground
search radars, and we started detecting additional logistics targets on
the western side of the island. As the B-1s started arriving they were
able to deal with many of these, zooming around at very low altitude,
and plastering the area with strings of iron bombs. They also started
working over the airfields, shutting the Kef runways while confidently
staying just out of AAA range. That's when the Grouse gunner lurking in
the residential area announced his presence, nailing a $200 million
strategic bomber with a shoulder launched missile. I never could spot
him, and had to spend the rest of the scenario another kilometer higher
to stay out of MANPADs range while bombing.

When the B-52s arrived they started laying down nice thunderous strings
of bombs across the two major airports. They only scuffed the HASs, but
did a nice job on hangars and other soft targets, racking up a fine
score of parked Su-24s. My fighters were almost all on station by this
point, and I was confident I could handle any sorties from eastern
Iceland, so rather than making single passes the bombers loitered in a
cab rank, and were sent in one at a time to grind down the enemy,
adopting a bomb-look-bomb policy. Some of the B-1s were sent around the
coastal airfields, destroying logistics sites and radars, while the
fighters stood guard, and dealt with the few remaining Russian aircraft
that popped up. (Although things got a bit hairy at one point when I was
confidently facing off against Su-27s. They had no jammers, and I was
screened by 4 of them. Nice and safe, right? Except the buggers were
cheerfully ignoring their radars, and using their IRSTs to lob long
range IR-guided Bs and Ds at me, dammit!)

Up to this point I'd stayed away from Hornafjordur in the SE corner of
Iceland. I hadn't seen any modern long-range SAMs in the Ryk/Kef area so
far, which made sense given the dedicated SEAD efforts in the SW in
previous scenarios, but in previous scenarios I'd usually left
Hornafjordur alone. If the SAMs were anywhere, they would be there. Long
range radar turned up one jammer and one mobile contact in the area,
which might have been a SAM, but I didn't want to get closer for a
better look. Eventually I gathered the courage to send one B-1 in from
the north, nap of the earth over the mountain and hurtling down the
valley towards Horn, hoping to stay screened below the valley walls
until it was too late for the enemy to react. Bursting out of the valley
mouth the bomber rushed towards the SAM site and seconds later it was
inside the SAM's minimum range, pulling up and dumping a dozen 500 lb
bombs across the battery, then pulling a few degrees left it shot across
the airbase, bombing the airfield radar as it dropped back down to
minimum altitude and rushed out to sea with all its jammers turned up to
11. Fortunately, that was the only SAM there, or the story might have
ended poorly.

After that the systematic bombing continued, and aircraft were
eventually recovered to their airbases in England, or back in Greenland
for the F-18s, EA-6s, and Hercs.
