**Spanish Army**

With a strength of 201,000 and 142,000 ready reserves, the Spanish Army
was quite a large force but somewhat under equipped in comparison to
other armies in NATO. Most formations were designed to be light, some
would say under-equipped, with only 300 tanks that could be considered
modern in 1994 (AMX-30). Structurally Spain would provide a Corps HQ
organized either as a mechanized or a mountain formation to reinforce
the land fight in southern Europe, probably in Turkey or Greece. There
were no forward deployed forces. Divisions were comprised of two
brigades, each having two regiments and in turn these had two
battalions; slightly smaller than a standard division (8 battalions vice
9) but very heavy on the command element.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image1.png" style="width:5.33403in;height:4.81389in" />

There are also a number of independent brigades of various types.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image2.png" style="width:1.15347in;height:5.52014in" />

In addition to the field army there were elements of supporting forces
and also territorial defence forces for Spanish colonies.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image3.png" style="width:2.49375in;height:3.14722in" />

A good summary of the Spanish Army in 1989 is located
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structure_of_the_Spanish_Army_in_1989),
very little changed between ’89 and ’94 when Northern Fury commences.

**Main Battle Tanks (MBT)**

Spain had quite a mix of mostly obsolete MBTs concentrated in
1<sup>st</sup> and 3<sup>rd</sup> Division; there were some older MBTs
in 2<sup>nd</sup> Division as well.

[**AMX-30**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/France/AMX-30.php)

Spain built most of its 299 AMX-30E (E for Spanish) under licence from
France. They also purchased 10 AMX-30D recovery vehicles and 18 AMX-30R
carrying the Roland SAM system. The AMX-30 could be considered on par
with the Leopard I, and Spain considered that tank but opted for the AMX
when France offered to produce it in Spain. All Spanish AMX’s had been
upgraded to the ‘M2’ standard with an improved fire control system,
improved engine and drive train as well as many other enhancements.
Historically only half of the AMX’s were improved while the remainder
received a cheaper and more problematic upgrade, in Northern Fury all
were upgraded to ‘M2’ standard. The Tank is used extensively in the
1<sup>st</sup> Armored Division and also within the mechanized brigades
of 3<sup>rd</sup> Division.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image4.jpg" style="width:4.6in;height:3.13472in" />

[**M60A3**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/US/M60_Patton.php)

Between 1990 and 1993, the United States provided Spain with 244 M60A3
Patton MBTs to replace their aging fleet of M47 and M48 tanks (also
provided by the US). These tanks were used in the 2<sup>nd</sup>
Division, the Cavalry Regt of 3<sup>rd</sup> Division and the two
independent Cavalry regiments. Although more reliable and updated than
the M48, these tanks were still obsolete.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image5.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.15764in" />

**M47/M48**

By 1994 these tanks had recently retired from Spanish service; however,
they were still quite numerous and available for reserves:

-   162x M48A5E2

-   329x M47E1

-   46x M47E2

**Reconnaissance Vehicles**

[**Panhard AML
60/90**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/France/Panhard_AML.php)

Spain used \~100 of each type of French built scout cars in their
reconnaissance units. The AML 60 with a breach loading 60mm mortar and
the AML 90 with a 90mm low velocity gun.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image6.png" style="width:2.80208in;height:1.94792in" />

[**Pegaso BMR-VEC**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VEC-M1)

This is a Spanish built, wheeled reconnaissance vehicles equipped with a
25mm chain gun. There were 240 of the six-wheeled version built and 100
four-wheeled variants which have retired and been placed in ready
reserve.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image7.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.27708in" />

**Armored Personnel Carries (APC)**

In addition to over 1,200 of the ubiquitous M113, the Spanish had
another ‘home grown’ solution. The BMR-600.

[**BMR-600**](https://army-guide.com/eng/product2069.html)

This Six-wheeled APC is small, versatile and fast. The basic troop
carrying version has a crew of two, can carry eight or nine infantrymen
and mounts a .50 Calibre MG. There are several variants including mortar
carrier, recovery vehicle, ambulance, engineering and anti-tank, and
command. Spain has over 1000 of these vehicles including variants.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image8.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" />

**Artillery**

Spain employed a wide variety of artillery systems, and was in the
process of upgrading its M107 (175mm Self Propelled) Howitzers to the
M110 (203mm). Northern Fury accelerates that process by a few months.

-   48x M108 Self Propelled (SP) 105mm Howitzer

-   400x M-26 Towed 105mm Howitzer

-   170x M-56 Pack/Towed 105mm Howitzer

-   176x 122mm Towed Gun

-   78x M109A1 SP 155mm Howitzer

-   84x M114/23 Towed 155mm Howitzer

-   24x M115 Towed 203mm Howitzer

-   24x M110A2 SP 203mm Howitzer (M107’s converted to M110’s)

-   12x Teruel 140mm SP Multiple Launch Rocket (MRL) (Spanish built)

<img src="/assets\images\nato\es\army\image9.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.875in" />

**Air Defence Systems**

Spain has a large number of air defence systems; the Nike-Hercules was
retired in 1990 but negotiations to procure the American Patriot system
are still ongoing in 1994.

-   329x GAO-BOI 20mm Towed AA Guns

-   96x GDF-002 35mm Twin Towed AA Guns

-   240x Bofors 40mmL/70 Towed AA Guns

-   132x M55 12.7mm Quad Towed MG

-   9x Roland 1 SAM (on AMX-30R)

-   9x Roland 2 SAM (on AMX-30R)

-   13x Aspide/Skyguard Fire units (3 or 4 launchers each)

-   48x I-Hawk
