**<span class="underline">Northern Fury \#1 – H-Hour</span>**

**<span class="underline">AAR by bladesinger79, Apr 2020</span>**

Finally\! Finished off this massive scenario, H-Hour, \#1 of the long
line of the Northern Fury campaign. The verdict? I KICKED THEIR ARSES\!
Numbers and long-ranged AA missiles favored the Russians, terrain and
superior quality equipment from a squadron of F-15 Eagles from the UK
favored myself as the Norwegians. For the invaders, it wasn’t even
close. I handed the Russians their heads. I took detailed notes but I’ll
skip a lot of that to tell the basic story. Here’s how the butt wupp’n
came down:

Before the war began, I added four platoons of I/HAWK batteries and
split them up to different locations; the closest one deployed at
Bardufoss. This turned out to be a complete waste as none of them saw
enemy planes get close enough to be fired at. For the infantry, I added
Carl Gustav weapons with six shots. This is because NOBODY operates a
platoon of grunts without some form of AT weaponry. Finally, I
discovered that three Norwegian fuel tanks started the game with 93.7%
damage. Uncertain as to why that was the case so I fixed that up. Other
than that, I left everything else alone.

From the start, I unassigned ALL of the aircraft from their missions and
had the four F-16s at Banak flee to Bardufoss fast as possible, the last
two were dangerously close from being shot down from a wave of Flankers.
I sank the closest group of Osas with Missile Group 2 before they were
sunk by the Nanuchkas who also sank the KV Nordkapp. Later on, both of
my subs sank everything else. I managed to find and sink one enemy sub,
but failed to find the other. With the surface ships eliminated, I used
one sub to attack the enemy landing craft before time ran out.
Slaughter.

The ground war was intense and fascinating. With proper positioning, I
managed to kill far more of the enemy than they did to me. It started
with sending 1plt/C from Kirkenes to find enemy artillery across the
border. They wiped them out\! The SAM section did a fine job of shooting
down several helos at Kirkenes during the enemy deployment. Kirkenes
completely destroyed the air assault wave of troops using their mortars
and good tactics, but not without casualties. Didn’t anticipate a second
wave on the ground from the border and was forced to retreat only one
platoon of survivors. Kirkenes held on for 6 hours before falling to the
enemy.

2 plt/C destroyed a majority of the attackers at Vardo before falling
back due to low ammo. 3 plt/C never had a chance at Vadso, neither did
HQ D against the naval infantry landing at Batsfjord. In the end, only
three platoons survived the scenario from the far eastern flank.

The Battle for Banak was the story. Using the battery of artillery and
keeping the mobile units moving around to spot the enemy, they killed
everything that came their way\! I counted six enemy Cubs shot down by
APC gunners (yes, they rolled a 1 to get the job done)\!\!\! Despite a
few enemy airstrikes, D Cav did a masterful job of denying the enemy the
airfield. The first wave was easily dispatched. The second wave of
mechanized infantry followed by a company of airborne were splotch
because THEY DID NOT ATTACK, THEY JUST STOOD THERE\! Later on, enemy
airborne artillery and scout vehicles were destroyed. Banak was never
threatened by ground forces again. The majority of the credit goes to
the artillery which I used extensively. The Cavalry then mopped up the
stragglers foolish enough to continue fighting. The Russians inflicted
some damage to the runway access point and a few other structures, but
those attacks were halted later on.

The air war. Now THIS is where I put some serious pain on the
opposition. The Russians would launch about a dozen Flankers and/or
Fulcrums into the area, where north or west of Banak, they would conduct
a circle jerk instead of hunting my planes down. I would use my Falcons
to target a few of their Floggers and Fencers before coming under fire
by the long-range AA-C missiles in a deadly game of tag and chase. No
enemy craft ever pushed closer than 25km to Bardufoss, but several
flights did try to attack that base with ASMs but all were shot down
because the Flankers and Fulcrums didn’t support them. For most of the
scenario, I kept my planes on the ground until the Grim Reapers of the
US 493rd Squadron arrived.

It was then the fight was in my favor.

I used a team effort to sniper off Flankers. I would use two flights of
expendable F-5s and/or F-16s from two different directions to force the
Flankers to fire off their AA-10s. Once they were depleted, a flight of
F-15s moved in for the kill. This did not always work, as several
incredible dogfights occurred with NATO suffering a few losses. But I
shot down far more of them than the opposite. Killing the Fulcrums were
far easier. By the time the scenario had 6 more hours remaining, I had
shot down all 40 Flankers and all 40 Fulcrums. From there on, it was a
turkey shoot.

When the dust settled, the smoke cleared, the bodies and debris stop
falling and the ships slid beneath the waves, the Russians were utterly
defeated. I destroyed 203 enemy aircraft, while losing 21 of my own.
MOST of the kills belonged to the Grim Reapers, but the Norwegians did
quite well on their own accord. In the last six hours I had the F-5s
from Holland and the Norwegian F-16s bombing enemy ground units at
Mehamn with little effect. A majority of damage at Banak was repaired
when it was over. Mehamn, Batsfjord, Vadso, Vardo, and Kirkenes were in
enemy hands, but the rest of Norway belongs to NATO. In 24 hours, the
offensive in Norway was completely halted by the valiant Norwegian
forces under my command\!

The War Cross with Swords goes out to the commander of the Cavalry Troop
in charge of defending Banak. I’m sure a few Royal Norwegian Orders of
St. Olav and Merit will be handed out as well. For the Russians: they
can expect some executions carried out\!

What a great scenario\! Final Score was 552\! I don’t understand why the
designer didn’t have the Flankers and Fulcrums really go aggressive in
the beginning against all AC. \#2, the Russian ground forces spent way
too much time idling before they attacked their objectives, while the
ground assault air units never went after the defenders. \#3, the
seemingly dozens of helos at Kirkenes and Vardo did practically nothing.
But it’s all good. I wish someone would design this specific battle as
the Russians but with more resources for NATO…I’d clean their clocks
out.

Lots of fun on this. Eager to continue the Northern Fury campaign. Hope
you folks enjoyed this AAR.
