**<span class="underline">Key Munitions for the USN in Northern
Fury</span>**

As an example of the type of ‘Rabbit Hole’ I find myself exploring, here
are some thoughts on US Navy ammunition stocks as the bear on the
Northern Fury scenarios and storylines. Building some of the later (and
larger) scenarios in Northern Fury, a realization struck me that many of
these missiles have long lead time production, relatively short
shelf-life, huge expense and a high expenditure rate. The thought
harkened back to the [Shell Crisis on 1915](about:blank), where the new
weapon of the day—quick firing artillery—was expending the estimated war
stock of artillery shells (1,000 -1,500 rounds per gun) in a few days.
So I thought that a similar situation might exist with all the high tech
weapons the US military was fielding.

Remarkably, most of the information about the relevant munitions is
readily available online and, perhaps surprisingly, most of the
stockpiles were quite robust. Please do not consider what follows a
complete—or even thorough— study. I very quickly realized that most
munitions in the US inventory would be quite sustainable and that
production would likely replace expenditure in rapid order, though I’m
not convinced that would be the same in other [NATO
countries](http://northernfury.us/nato/). So, focusing on a few high end
munitions, it was apparent that in most cases the limitations outlined
here did not stem from lack of planning as much from lack of time. With
the exception of the AIM-54, most missiles relevant to our story were
still in production in 1994 and several had only been in service for a
few months, or perhaps a year. Still, our conflict would likely create a
shortage of available stock. To be true to the story and add more
complexity to the NF scenarios, we’ll be using the below limitations
going forward.

Usage: Twelve [big deck carriers](http://northernfury.us/blog/post8/)
are operating to various degrees in the first month of the war. These
include Big-E, Nimitz, Ike, Carl V, & TR are in the Atlantic/Med; Sara
is in the Indian Ocean; Kennedy is first in the Caribbean then on SLOC
duty; and GW, Abe, Kitty, Connie & Indy are in the Pacific. Two more are
preparing (Ranger in the Pacific & John C Stennis in the Atlantic). Each
of these carriers will be holding their basic loadout, which varies per
munition. We’ve made calculations below for early March ’94, so during
the first month or war at least eight carriers have had a complete
restock (4 in each major Fleet), this is a gross estimation but will
serve as a basis for stocks left for distributions to the Fleet. We’re
also convinced that the average COMMAND player will have expended much
more than these estimates in earlier scenarios.

One other factor for considerations is that many of the missiles below
were designed to equip the upgraded
[F/A-18C](http://northernfury.us/nato/us/navy/aviation/). The upgrades
to this airframe necessary to fire these newer weapons are ongoing in
the early phases of the war in the Atlantic, but very few of these
aircraft equip Pacific squadrons. As such, the bulk of these ammo issues
are specific to the Northern battleset.

As a reminder, below are the Northern Fury [USN Fleet
boundaries](http://northernfury.us/blog/post4/):

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image1.JPG)

**Munitions under consideration:**

**[AGM-84E: SLAM](about:blank):** This versatile missile entered design
initial production in 1987 and series production began in 1989, ramping
up from 72 that year to 250 per year in 1992. By war start 900 had been
produced for the USN. A rough estimate has about 200 being expended in
the first month of the war, with another 300 in carrier magazines.
Distribution of the remaining 400 is:

1.  2nd Fleet: 200

2.  3rd Fleet: 12

3.  5th Fleet: 12

4.  6th Fleet: 24

5.  7th Fleet: 150

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image2.jpg)

**[AGM-88C: HARM](about:blank):** Although thousands were eventually
produced, the ‘C’ model only entered service in 1993. In a stretch for
[Northern Fury timeline](http://northernfury.us/blog/post7/),
introduction could occur as early as mid-1992, but under restricted
deployment conditions. We will assume that approximately 1,000 AGM-88C
are available and, because the bulk of the aircraft that use this model
are based in 2<sup>nd</sup> Fleet’s theater, 80% of the stocks will be
available in the Atlantic and Mediterranean. Another assumption is that
the six carriers using them will have expended 300 of these missiles,
with another 200 in stock. Distribution of the remainder is:

1.  2nd Fleet: 400

2.  3rd Fleet: 0

3.  5th Fleet: 48

4.  6th Fleet: 0

5.  7th Fleet: 48

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image3.jpg)

**[AIM-7P: Sparrow](about:blank):** This missile was an upgrade of the
AIM-7M and was meant to be compatible (in regards to the
software/hardware on the aircraft) with—and compensate for—the slow
development of the AIM-120. Only 1,232 were ordered and these numbers
included the RIM-7P ship-based SAM. In Northern Fury we will double this
number and remove 800 for ship based systems, leaving about 1,600 for
Naval Aviation. Most of the AIM-9P-capable aircraft are in the Atlantic
and we’ll assume that half of the available stock has been fired or is
onboard the carriers. This leaves 800 for distribution:

1.  2nd Fleet: 600

2.  3rd Fleet: 0

3.  5th Fleet: 100

4.  6th Fleet: 0

5.  7th Fleet: 100

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image4.jpg)

**[AIM-54: Phoenix](about:blank):** The AIM-54C is a large and complex
missile. Each takes two years to produce and costs an estimated
$920-$970 thousand. Various estimates state that about 2000 AIM-54C were
in inventory at the end of production in 1993. The most generous
estimate is that about 2,500 of these weapons were produced. Deducting
about 10% for R\&D, testing and range firing brings that estimate to
about 2,250, which roughly agrees with other figures of available
stocks. Assuming that production continued and was ramped up slightly,
we can reasonably assume that about 2,800 AIM-54C (& ‘C+’) are available
in Northern Fury. With 1,400 being consumed as the basic load of the
fleet and another 800 being fired in the first month, we’re left with a
grand total of 600 missiles available to resupply the Fleet. Allocation
of remaining stockpiles as follows:

1.  2<sup>nd</sup> Fleet: 320

2.  3<sup>rd</sup> Fleet: 48

3.  5<sup>th</sup> Fleet: 32

4.  6<sup>th</sup> Fleet: 0

5.  7<sup>th</sup> Fleet: 200

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image5.jpg)

**[AIM-120A: AMRAAM](about:blank):** The ‘A’ model of this weapon became
operational in 1991 with the Navy receiving the first deliveries in
1993. Production of this version ended in December, 1994, with 3,500
weapons received between the [Air
Force](http://northernfury.us/nato/us/air/) and
[Navy](http://northernfury.us/nato/us/navy/aviation/). If we assume that
production was ramped up and that the Navy gets 1/3<sup>rd</sup> of that
number, we can go with about 1,000 missiles available. Most of the
aircraft capable of using them are in the Atlantic. Usage started slow,
as only a few AMRAAM capable squadrons were in action, so an estimated
expenditure and stock on the carriers amounts to about 500, leaving
another 500 for allocation:

1.  2<sup>nd</sup> Fleet: 350

2.  3<sup>rd</sup> Fleet: 0

3.  5<sup>th</sup> Fleet: 30

4.  6<sup>th</sup> Fleet: 0

5.  7<sup>th</sup> Fleet: 120

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image6.jpg)

[**BGM-109C/D: TLAM/TSAM/SLCM**](about:blank): Collectively called
**‘Tomahawk’** this family of missiles was fairly prolific, but the
delivery of variants was tightly controlled. The Tomahawk Land Attack
Missile (TLAM) was much more successful than the Tomahawk Anti-Ship
Missile (TASM); both of these could be submarine-launched to become a
Submarine Launched Cruise Missile (SLCM). A nuclear Ground Launched
Cruise Missile (GLCM) version also existed. The nomenclature of these
missiles depended on their launch mechanism: generically when fired from
a ground launcher they are BGM-109, fired from surface ships they’re
designated RGM-109, from submarines UGM-109, and from an aircraft
AGM-109. Expenditure of these weapons would normally be controlled at
the Operational level, so authority from Fleet HQ would be required. In
scenarios the authorized expenditure is provided in the briefing and
excess missiles are removed. The US (and UK) have historically used
TLAMs liberally; prior to Northern Fury 357 were fired in the Gulf War
and subsequent engagements in Iraq, with 278 being replaced with
supplementary production. Numbers available at war start are:

1.  BGM-109B, TASM unitary anti-ship: 350 (200 already converted to
    TLAM-C)

2.  BGM-109C, TLAM unitary warhead: 1,575

3.  BGM-109D, TLAM cluster munition warhead: 850

By 1994 both Block II and Block III versions were available, but the
Block IIIs were just emerging and two of the major upgrade features were
based on satellite linkage that became problematic on the first day of
the war. The Block III version of the TLAM included five major
improvements:

1.  GPS guidance—however, most satellites were destroyed in the first
    day or so of the war, either by direct attack or debris, so this
    improvement was nullified.

2.  Better computing power, which is not reflected in game.

3.  Time on Target (TOT) planning, which is also GPS dependent.

4.  Insensitive munition warhead, which reduces weight among other
    improvements to the explosive component.

5.  An improved engine.

In game the key changes are a range increase from 675 nautical miles to
1,000, and a probability of hit increase from 85% to 90%. The GPS
guidance entailed about a 20% range increase because of better flight
path planning, while the reduced warhead weight and improved engine
increased range by another 20%. The number of Block IIIs available in
1994 is hard to pin down, but would be relatively small. Since all TLAMs
are allocated by scenario, the Block IIIs will be reserved for the end
war phase when a limited replacement GPS constellation is deployed.

In due course we’ll go back over all scenarios and account for TLAM
expenditure. We believe about 400 have been expended in the Atlantic and
45 in the Mediterranean, so we’ll retro-fit them all to be Block IIs and
confirm the numbers are accurate. We’ll need to save about 600-700 for
the last couple scenarios—just saying.

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image7.jpg)

![](/assets/images/blog/post25/image8.jpg)
