**Northern Fury – Here Comes the Cavalry**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Oct 2015</u>**

Plans made, courses laid in, CAP and ELINT patrols spread out, and one
reckless Sierra destroyed. Now the long wait through the night,
monitoring the patrol paths of the Badgers, Mainstays, and Cubs, and
cursing the limitations which prevent me from taking them down. Wait
until tomorrow?? No action north of 65º??? GAAAAHHHHH! I know I could
bite off some of those juicy jammers and ELINT planes right now if it
wasn't for those damned orders saying don't. All those valuable
vulnerable support planes north of Iceland, just out of reach by
regulations. I can't take it!

The quiet night continues... Things are relatively still on the big
ships. ESM operators stare at their glowing screens, continuing to
monitor enemy patrol patterns, while fighter pilots shift restlessly in
their bunks and try futilely to get some sleep before the big day.

But under the waves, the San Juan, cruising at 20 kts towards the
carrier groups, has a direct path submerged contact in the layer. Slow
to 5 kts! SSN for sure, but what type? Has it seen us? Can we wait for
aircraft to deal with it safely? The San Juan turns west, then east, and
the contact changes course to intercept each time. We've been had! Two
Mk 48s spread shot BOL, low speed at kinematic range, then duck under
the layer and turn to run at flank in case he's already launched.
Hopefully he'll evade, get pushed away, and lose us while he's running.
Then we can break contact, get stealthy, and let the aircraft deal with
it. But it never comes to that. The SSN doesn't evade, and one of our
Mk48s solves the problem for us. Run a little longer, cut speed, check
baffles, then up into the layer and course change back towards the
carrier group.

The quiet night continues... Things are relatively still on the big
ships. ESM operators stare at their glowing screens, continuing to
monitor enemy patrol patterns, while fighter pilots shift restlessly in
their bunks and try futilely to get some sleep before the big day.

But under the waves, the San Juan, cruising at 20 kts towards the
carrier groups, has a direct path submerged contact in the layer. Slow
to 5 kts! SSN for sure, but what type? Has it seen us? Can we wait for
aircraft to deal with it safely? The San Juan turns west, then east, and
the contact changes course to intercept each time. We've been had! Two
Mk 48s spread shot BOL, low speed at kinematic range, then duck under
the layer and turn to run at flank in case he's already launched.
Hopefully he'll evade, get pushed away, and lose us while he's running.
Then we can break contact, get stealthy, and let the aircraft deal with
it. But it never comes to that. The SSN doesn't evade, and one of our
Mk48s solves the problem for us. Run a little longer, cut speed, check
baffles, then up into the layer and course change back towards the
carrier group.

The night continues... Busy night for San Juan...

CZ contact NNW! The San Juan cuts back to creep again, and the contact
firms up rapidly. 1st CZ, under the layer, definitely an SSN, cruising
on a course towards our position at the end of our speed run. Looks like
he heard us charging around at flank speed in the deep sound channel and
is coming to investigate. This time there is time and clearance enough
to wait for the aircraft, and a pair of S-3s work the contact, which
turns out to be an older Victor I. It may be old, but it's tough, and
its decoys work well enough that it takes 4 torps to sink it.

Maybe I should try deliberately making noise with one sub to draw enemy
subs towards a line of stealthy ones? Risky... Hmmm...

It's 10:30 Zulu, attack Waves 1 and 2 are complete, and Wave 2 is now
retiring back to the carriers, so it's time for a sitrep.

During the night the carrier groups steamed towards each other, staying
down around 57N, while the subs pulled back in order to cover the
carriers more closely (the Newport News sinking an Alfa in the process,
bringing the total subs sunk up to 4). The carrier groups are now only
\~ 40 miles apart, and will soon turn north, in parallel, flanked by the
Ticos. The best ASW units are screening around them, predominantly to
the N, so hopefully there isn't something ultra-stealthy coming up from
the south. In a risky move I have detached the two Virginias and a
Spruance and sent them north about 90 miles, intending to use them as a
SAM trap to attrite and disrupt any Su-24 raids coming south from
Iceland. Intelligence reports a division of bombers there, but so far I
haven't seen any sign of them, so thankfully this hasn't been put to the
test. There's been no sign of our long-range friends from Andoya either,
and they could be a real problem if they show up while the bulk of my
fighters are up in Iceland. I'm keeping a picket out east to look for
them, just in case.

Two F-14s with TARPS pods went in just before the main attack wave, one
to recce the coast near Keflavik, and one going along the coast towards
Hornafjordur. (I wanted to know whether the coast between the two was
defended.) The Keflavik plane found a pair of suspected SAM sites on the
mountain ridge S of Keflavik and Reykjavik, and decided not to press its
luck any further. The Hornafjordur plane also found a pair of SAM sites
and then got shot down for its troubles. The range on the TARPS pods is
just too short in the face of good SAMs.

Attack Wave 1 went in at 0600Z. I sent out four lightly loaded F-14s
each to the far W and E of Iceland, hoping to prey on the Russian
support planes near the ends of their patrol routes. Using extreme range
Phoenix shots I managed to get one elint Badger out W, and one Su-24
jammer out E, but barely escaped from the angry swarm of Mig-23s that
came boiling out of Hornafjordur. Using 8 planes this way wasn't very
productive, so I didn't repeat it in Wave 2. I didn't even try to make
any ground attacks in Wave 1, reserving my TLAMs and ground attack
aircraft for later. There are so many Russian planes up that they would
never have made it through.

The main attack approached Keflavik from the SSE and also from the W,
with F-14s followed up with F-18s and heavy jammer support. The attack
from the SSE drew piles of Mig 23s from Hornafjordur as well as numerous
planes of all sorts from Keflavik, while the attack from the west only
had Keflavik planes to deal with. Since the Russians are using
semi-active missiles my jammers gave me a powerful range advantage, and
even when they do manage to get a fix on me the launch is disrupted
except at very close range. My active AMRAAMs and Phoenixes are not
hampered this way in return, so the battle went very well, with the
Phoenixes reaching deep into the enemy formations to destroy the
dangerous Mig-31s, AMRAAMs tackling modern fighters, and Sparrows
reserved for clumsier Mig-23s (when I don't happen to be pointing at an
enemy jammer). I try to keep my distance, so Sidewinder shots are rare
(I've only used 7 so far). Besides, a Sidewinder launch usually means an
Archer is coming my way in return, which is a bad exchange. Distance is
my friend!

Attack wave 2 went in several hours later, with a ground attack
component of F-18s toting SLAMs, HARMS, and TALDs following the fighters
at a safe distance. This attack only focused on Keflavik, staying away
from Hornafjordur, and once again the air battle went well. So well, in
fact, that I manage to temporarily clear the skies, pushing in close
enough to Keflavik that the airfield was in range of my Phoenixes, and I
could engage aircraft the moment they lifted off. Taking advantage of
this gap some of my F-14s headed inland north of Keflavik and managed to
down another Su-24, the pair of AWACs, and even the jammer Cub, all
while staying a hairs-breadth south of their mandated navigation limit.
The Russians tried to launch replacements, but this didn't end well when
the airfield was in Phoenix range. (Is there a LUA way to prevent a
mission from taking off if enemy are too close to the base?)

The ground attack didn't go too badly, in the sense that none of my
attack planes were shot down, and I managed to destroy one SAM site and
damage another, but this is only a small scratch in what turns out to be
an enormous SAM complex. As my TALDs and SLAMs were going in radars
started lighting up all over the place, and now my ELINT planes have
managed to plot the location of most of them. Wave 3 will target some of
these with TLAMs (I still haven't used any), and I expect some will get
through, but there's no way I'll be able to get them all.

Wave 3's done, experiencing significantly less resistance. My fighters
approached all three airbases looking for foes, and got a bunch of
Mig-23s, and a handful of modern fighters, but nothing like earlier in
the day. TLAMs and a few more SLAMs knocked out additional SAM sites,
bringing the total destroyed up to 7. (The SAM sites didn't see the
missiles coming, due to lack of airborne radar cover, and therefore did
not fire in self defence. Is there a LUA way to say "If AWACS = 0,
ground radars = ON"?) The skies were clear when I left, except for the
support planes up north. Some more CAP sprang up again after I left, but
not in great strength.

Final tally was 250 fighters of various types, including all the
Mig-31s, and an additional 12 support planes (AWACS, jammers, ELINT). I
managed to hide from the bombers so they did not launch against me, and
remained untouched on the ground.
