**Northern Fury â€“ Wrestling an Octopus**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by AndrewJ Feb 2017</span>**

Before I started this one, I rearranged my defence slightly using the
editor. I left the dug-in infantry where it was, but moved around some
of the mobile units. Some of the changes were cosmetic (putting all the
M48s in the rear, and all the Leopards up front - it seemed odd that the
companies would be intermingled). Other changes were to improve the
siting of the air defences and radars, taking advantage of hilltops,
concentrating around my artillery and rear areas, and providing mutual
support between gun systems and missiles. I also tightened up the
armour, grouping the platoons in pairs to improve their local punch.

My starting plan was to send out many of my helicopters as quickly as
possible, to try and get a grasp of the size and location of the enemy
ground formations, while making a major effort to engage the divisional
arty group with concentrated air strikes. I did not want the "Red God of
War" left intact. This effort would be led by all my 'good' F-16s
(toting AMRAAMs), in an effort to knock down enemy CAP and rapidly gain
the upper hand in the air, and followed by most of my other strike
aircraft. One Patriot (the most damaged, and thus most expendable one)
would stay active to provide surveillance, while the others would stay
covert for the moment.

The threat of SSM attacks on my helicopter base had me worried, so the
very first thing to fly were my Apache, which I definitely wanted to get
out of the area ASAP, followed by my scout helicopters. They all went
scurrying down the valleys at nape of the earth level, scouting ahead to
find the foe, confident that their stealthy terrain masking would keep
them safe. What they actually found was that the fast-moving Russian
fighters from nearby bases were all over them before the bulk of my
fighters could arrive, and they could see my helicopters just fine.
Fleeing at 140 kts does little to help when the enemy's closing at over
900... Three scout helicopters and a precious Apache were lost as a
result of this debacle.

The Patriots did what they could to engage the fighters, but the main
effect was to drive the nimble fighters down into the weeds where the
Patriots couldn't see them any more, and my SAMs only got one kill.
Shortly afterwards the Patriot radar started detecting incoming SSMs,
and they actually managed to hit the first few. However, it soon became
apparent that the SSMs were being directed towards my non-critical
combat units, such as the dug-in infantry, where I had a reasonable
amount of redundancy, and the hits weren't actually doing all that much
damage. Accordingly, I stopped engaging the SSMs, and decided to
preserve my missiles for more critical targets.

As my good fighters started arriving I was able to shoot down or drive
off the Floggers and Fulcrums, before engaging the SAMs in the DAG area.
I didn't have great luck with my HARMs, since there were only a limited
number of them, and it was actually cluster bombing F-16s popping over
the ridgelines at low altitude which did the trick, catching the SA-11s
before they could react. With a pair of batteries destroyed on the SW
side of the DAG, the A-10s were able to use Mavericks from above the
effective ceiling of the SA-15s and destroy the SHORADS in that area.
This left a clear gap for the strike aircraft to pour through, and soon
there were rich pickings in that area as the strikers worked over the
artillery. (And wow, the Soviets have a \*lot\* of arty. I would have
been absolutely flattened if this had been able to engage.)

The strikes soon spread out, tracking back along the path of the
division to the NW. There were clouds of Hinds in the air, presumably
ready to pounce on any of my ground troops, but since there are none in
the area they turn out to be little more than tasty snacks for passing
fighters. I spot a couple of their FARPs and manage to bomb one while
it's still got many of its units on the ground. It looks like there's a
BTR-80 motor rifle regiment in the lead, and my strikers wreck it with
repeated bombing and strafing runs. The tank battalion is tough, but the
A-10s tear it up with cannon fire and Mavericks, and the Cobras do a
good job with ATGMs. At one point there's a surprise when a flight of
four Mig-27s bursts over a mountain ridge right into a flock of A-10s,
who suddenly remember they have Sidewinders, and wheel about to put them
to good use.

Progress continues up to the area where one of the SSMs was stationed,
but then runs into a wall because there are another set of SA-11s and
SHORADs on the high ground just to the NW of the Nordberg airstrip. I'm
out of HARMs, and I can't get a good fix on the SAMs to engage with
short range weapons. Fortunately, there is a deep valley leading up to
the airfield, and I'm just able to sneak helicopters along it, where
they report that the airfield's full of Su-25s\! They engage a few with
the last of their TOWs, before turning home on fumes and calling for air
strikes. A pair of F-5s manage to make it down the valley, dumping
sticks of 500 lb bombs on the crowded tarmac spaces, and causing a
satisfying amount of carnage. Oh, and by the way, there's another
battalion + coming down the valley. Two flights of A-10s are sent to
deal with those (and with the SA-8 which pops up a few miles further
along the valley), and they manage to survive by sticking to the valley
floor with SA-11s hurtling overhead. Terrain masking is the only thing
keeping them alive\!

Still, even though the SA-8 is down, the pair of SA-11s and the SA-15 at
the north end of the valley are holding everything at bay. Fortunately,
there's one more valley, this one approaching from the west, and a scout
helicopter reports it is empty and has a view of the SAMs. Another pair
of Maverick toting A-10s are sent to attempt it. By the time they get
there the empty valley is filled with yet another battalion, but they
charge onwards nonetheless, and start salvoing missiles at the SAMs. One
of them doesn't make it, but Mavericks are fire and forget and continue
relentlessly to their targets, and both SA-11s are destroyed.

But by this point my strikers are almost all out of munitions, and
they're already reloading or hurrying back to base, so I'm not able to
follow up immediately. I leave a few aircraft behind to act as CAP, but
most units return home. Of course, this is the point when the Soviet air
force decides to intervene. At first there are a few flights of Mig-23s,
which are not too hard to deal with, but then my forward airbase at
Hamar (the empty fixed-wing FARP, not the helicopter base) reports that
it is under attack. There's some damage, but nothing too bad, and I
chase down and deal with those strikers. The strikes have me a little
concerned, since I never saw the aircraft coming, so I spread out my
modern F-16s and turn on their radars to act as 'mini-AWACs' along
expected routes of enemy ingress. At first I see nothing, but then
flight after flight of Su-25s start coming in from the north, and as I
rush about from one to the next I realize I'm rapidly running out of
aircraft to deal with them. They're too low for my Patriots to see and
engage, so my long range air defence is essentially useless (although
the Stinger attached to one Patriot manages a kill when an Su-25 comes
right over the battery). Despite the fact that I start launching
strikers as interceptors, just to make use of their defensive
Sidewinders, I can't stop them all. There are swarms of the wretched
things\! My leading company positions in the NW get shot up, and the
FARP takes another heavy strike which destroys the ammo revetment,
rendering the facility useless. At least I got most of the SU-25s before
they could make it home, so they shouldn't be able to do that twice. If
they'd come en-masse things could have been quite nasty.

Hopefully things have calmed down for the moment. My flights are
somewhat disorganized now, since many of my strikers were launched
prematurely to fend off the swarm, but I'll execute quick-turnaround
strike \#2 as best I can, before standing down the strikers for the rest
of the morning. (I had hoped to use the FARP to move up the F-5s after
their initial pair of strikes, but that's off the table now.
Fortunately, they weren't there when it got hit.) I'll mount CAP and see
what happens until my strikers are ready again in the afternoon.
Fortunately the incoming division's moving fairly slowly, so I think I
should have some time. I've wrecked the leading BTR MRR, but that leaves
the second MRR of the same type, along with the BMP MRR and the tank
regiment. That's a lot of power left to come...
