**Northern Fury â€“ Ant Eaters Revenge**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Dec 2015</u>**

In other notes: They're sending me up against SA-20s with Mk82s! I'm
gonna die!

Well, the sparring between the F-15s and their west CAP is underway, and
the two AGIs are underwater, but I don't think I'm making meaningful
progress yet.

***Maromak**: How did you take down the AGIs? Did you use the P-3s or an
F-117?*

It was the P-3s. After dealing with the AGIs one went up around the
north coast, while the other went along the south coast to look for
other ships. The one down south hasn't found anything else, but now it's
running away from the residue of a dogfight, anxiously hoping the
remaining Russians won't pursue too far. It's still got a couple of
missiles, but probably won't be able to use them, except maybe as a BOL
decoy. The one up north found a Russian merchant and put its last two
missiles into it, setting it on fire but not sinking it. Hopefully it
will burn out. The P-3s are being sent to the Greenland base after their
mission is done.

One of my F-15s cleverly identified the Sovremenny by collecting one of
its missiles, before I grew a brain and used the TR-1's radar to find
the ships in the bay. I doubt I'll be able to sink the DD/CG group with
missiles, because I can't generate enough Harpoons at once, but I may be
able to get rid of the PCF or the FF with them, and I should be able to
finish off the freighter.

So far I've managed to destroy the radars on the northern arm, including
the SA-20's set, by sneaking down through the fjords from the north, and
keeping the ridge between me and trouble. Then once the ridge was
"clear" (I suspect there's actually more short range stuff still there)
I was able to get the Reykyavik SA-20 as well by popping up over the
ridgeline, firing my HARMs, and then scurrying back down into cover. The
radar on the volcano hasn't started transmitting yet, and the Keflavik
SA-20 is still keeping its silence also.

The air war has gone well so far, with two main waves of defenders
destroyed, but I've essentially run out of AMRAAMs and Sparrows, so I
have no real offensive capability until the final bunch of F-15s and
F-16s show up just before the F-111 strike. This means I'm in run-away
mode for now. I got two of the Mainstays by sending F-15s over the
center of Iceland while the defenders were busy elsewhere, which should
help. I've left the F-117s on the 'ground' for the moment, to simulate a
later strike, along with some F-15s to escort them. Based on the
briefing the environment was just too dangerous to send them in at
first. If I can get the Keflavik SA-20 I may send the F-117s in before
the F-111s arrive. The TR-1 has found so many 'MOBILE' units on the Kef
airfield that the F-111s would be absolutely slaughtered at low level,
but the F-117s may be able to clear some of those defences for them.
Unfortunately, that would mean I can't use the F-117s on the various
building targets, where I think they would really shine.

It's an interesting scenario, that's for sure.

I've kept playing the initial version to see how it was going.

Skirmishing continued while I waited for the next group of strikers (the
next SEAD package) to arrive. With only a few Sidewinder toting F-15s
left I was able to draw off a few Su-27s (relying on tankers to outlast
the enemy), and even got a few by burnering up behind them as they
returned to base, but for the most part I was driven back. My P-3s spent
so much fuel running away at military power that they couldn't get back
to the fight, and they had to take their Harpoons home. Tankers and
AWACs fled for their lives. Even the TR-1, which could ignore the
Mig-29s, had to run away.

When the SEAD package arrive I brought it across Iceland from the NW to
the center (well escorted with jammers), and sent the main body of it
south to try and hook around at Keflavik from the SE. My hope was that
by coming in over the water I could hide behind the ridgeline from the
Keflavik SAM forest until I was extremely close, and thus deny the SAMs
time to react. Unfortunately the southern SA-20 was well sited to deal
with that, and it engaged me at \~ 30 nm. I shot back with everything,
and of the massed salvo of HARMs only two managed to get through. That
was enough to destroy the Tombstone, joy joy! And then the next
Tombstone lit up in Keflavik. And then another one after that!

I did like the self-escorting SEAD package, in the form of the F-16s,
and their AMRAAMs were very useful for picking off isolated fighters
that straggled in to try and attack. I had also sent a few SEAD planes
to tackle the central surveillance radar and the SE surveillance radar
near Hornafjordur. I got that one by lobbing HARMs up over the glacier
in BOL mode, and then scurrying down the valley to escape to the NE, but
the moment it went down the central Big Bird radar lit up, and I really
didn't need that. The Maverick F-16s had been very useful for knocking
off the isolated short range air defences up there (as well shooting
down planes as they lifted off from Reykjavik), and they quickly got rid
of the Big Bird. And then everything lit up, including yet another
Tombstone, which I needed even less!

My F-117s (which I had delayed from the original schedule) were inbound
at this point, and they skirted the Keflavik SAMs to the N, and then
curved around to approach Reykjavik from the NE, so they could come in
from as far away from Keflavik as possible, using a very tight jammer
escort. One got too far away from its jammer and was nailed by an SA-10
from Keflavik, but the others managed to deliver their bombs, sinking
both freighters, destroying all three runways, and blowing up the
control tower. Then they ran for it, pursued by angry Su-27s from
Keflavik, at exactly the time my AMRAAM toting F-16 reserve decided to
fly away and refuel! Two remaining F-15s did their best, but they
couldn't save them all. (I actually had more F-15s, and I had
specifically planned to use them as escorts for the F-117s, but then I
second guessed myself and postponed them to escort the F-111s. Lesson
learned! Always cover your extraction!)

At that point I made the decision to call off the F-111 strike, and I
flew them directly to England. Reykjavik was shut, but still had potent
close range defences, and there wasn't much more to be gained from
hitting it again. The Keflavik SAM forest was simply impossible.
Hornafjordur had at least one SA-20 and one SA-10, which would probably
have meant heavy losses. Akureyri was a possibility, since I hadn't
spotted much up there, but there may have been hidden things, and I
didn't think there was much to be gained from hitting a small field.
(Looking at it afterwards, I should have made a better recce with the
TR-1, and then I would have known I was able to tackle it. Another
lesson learned! Recce!)

In the end I had shot down most of the flyable Russian aircraft (not
counting the Su-24s and tankers), wrecked the runways at Reykjavik, sunk
three merchants, sunk three AGIs, destroyed three Tombstones, and a
number of other radars and SHORADS. I tried a few more things
afterwards, rerunning the SEAD attack to see if I could have any effect
on the main Keflavik air defences. I could never get a missile through,
and every single HARM was invariably shot down. I couldn't find an
effective way to terrain mask in close enough to it either.

Despite the difficulty this was a challenging and interesting scenario.
It really pointed out that you can't just 'wing it', and you need to
plan and coordinate your strikes and support. Flight times must mesh! If
I had properly timed my escorts, tightened up the coordination of my
F-117s and SEAD, kept my support aircraft in safer zones, and used my
recce properly, then my progress would have been much better. It pointed
out that you have to very carefully plot your flight paths to take
advantage of terrain masking, and to be prepared for when the enemy has
anticipated your terrain routes and plugged them with a SAM. It also
makes you face a situation where you need to be willing to recognize and
admit when something's not going to work, and to call it off before it
becomes a disaster. I don't think (in its initial version) it would be
everyone's cup of tea, but I'm glad I played it.
