**Indian Ocean Fury 1: Persian Pounce.**

13 Feb 1994, 1400 Zulu, 1800 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\iof\iof1\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:5.2in" alt="USS Saratoga (CV-60) - Wikipedia" />

Youâ€™re commanding the US 5<sup>th</sup> Fleet on the flagship *USS La
Salle* based in Manama Bahrain. Your command was re-established Dec 93
(18 months earlier then it historically was) and oversees both afloat
and shore-based units that rotationally deploy or surge into the Gulf.
Units under your command are American (USN, USMC, USAF and US Army),
British, French, Italian, Spanish, and Australian. Although much of your
force is off on independent operations in the Indian Ocean and beyond,
the primary responsibility in this region is safe and secure passage of
commercial shipping through the Persian Gulf and Straights of Hormuz.

For this task you have: The *USS Saratoga* CVBG patrolling in the Gulf
of Oman; 16 independent warships from several nations patrolling
different areas of the Gulf and Straights; one submarine; several
support vessels; several air squadrons; and a mine countermeasures
group.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\iof\iof1\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" alt="The Iranian air force - unexpectedly sharp teeth?" />

**<u>Indian Ocean Fury \#1</u>** is an intense scenario with significant
action early on as Iran, supported by Soviet advisors and visiting
aircraft launch a surprise attack on shipping in the Persian Gulf. The
first few hours will see a surge of aircraft and missiles into the Gulf
and Straits of Hormuz. Casualties will be high. Diplomatic efforts
behind the scenes quickly kick in and over a few hours Gulf States join
the fight with various levels of enthusiasm.

The player will receive direction which will be difficult to enact as
the tactical situation interferes with strategic and operational
imperatives.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\iof\iof1\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.45833in;height:2.58333in" alt="Iran to conduct large-scale &amp;#39;Swarm Drill&amp;#39; for blockade of Strait of Hormuz, allege US officials" />
