![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image1.jpeg)

The Soviet Navy was late to the game when it comes to using aircraft
carriers or, as they were called to bypass the "Montrose Convention,"
and perhaps more accurately, "Aviation Cruisers." In previous blogs we
discussed how [US Aircraft
Carriers](http://northernfury.us/blog/index.php?controller=post&action=view&id_post=8)
form the core of that country's power projection and global influence
strategy, as well as how the smaller [NATO
Carriers](http://northernfury.us/blog/index.php?controller=post&action=view&id_post=12) fill
roles which free up the Americans behemoths from many minor tasks. Here
we will focus on the Soviet use of carriers to fulfil even different
roles.

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image2.jpeg)

Soviet carriers were not built for power projection. For this the Soviet
Navy relied upon Long Range Aviation (LRA) and submarines. For the first
30 years of the Cold war, the main purpose of Soviet surface forces was
to protect these two major strike arms, they did this by both missile
attacks against NATO forces and by Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW). Keeping
NATO forces at arm’s length from Soviet bases and SSBN Bastions,
particularly the Kola Peninsula and Barents Sea, was key to protecting
the Soviet Union's ability to strike mortal blows when required. In the
late 1970s the surface forces' role started to evolve; if the missile
and ASW forces were to survive long enough to protect the bastions, they
needed air cover.

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image3.jpeg)

Soviet Aviation Cruisers had two basic roles: firstly, as flagship of
ASW task groups similar to their European NATO adversaries, and secondly
to provide air to air cover for ASW and missile task groups. Although
ship-borne aviation could perform limited strike tasks, that was purely
a secondary role. With the introduction of the larger ***Kuznetzov***
class the groundwork was laid for an expansion of the air-to-air role,
in which carrier aviation would provide escort for LRA strikes. However,
such missions would only be possible under specific circumstances.

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image4.jpeg)

The design of the Soviet carriers then was somewhat unique. In addition
to carrying aircraft, these ships act as strike cruisers, carrying
powerful sensors, capable ASW systems, and a formidable anti-surface and
anti-aircraft arsenal. Below is a rundown of the various Soviet carrier
classes:

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image5.jpeg)

[**Moskva
Class**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moskva-class_helicopter_carrier)

The two ships of the ***Moskva*** class were the Soviet Navy’s first
foray into large Aviation Cruisers, and it was unfortunately, not a good
effort. Deploying in the 1960’s they were limited by terrible
reliability and reportedly worse sea keeping properties. These ships
were eventually transferred to the Mediterranean, where the generally
calm weather would better suit their abilities. The design of the
***Moskva*** class was also evolutionary, lacking the long-range
anti-air or anti-surface missiles of their successors. The Soviet Navy
learned many very hard lessons with this class, however, to fill Command
and Control (C2) duties on extended cruises and to lead an ASW task
group, they were far better than anything else on offer. The ability to
carry 18 helicopters and provide maintenance facilities for the others
in the fleet was a major improvement for far flung task groups and
created a formidable ASW force that NATO was forced to recon with. In
*Northern Fury*, as in the historical world, both ships are members of
the Black Sea Fleet and are in the Mediterranean at war start;
***Moskva*** off the coast of Syria and ***Leningrad*** near Tripoli
Libya.

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image6.jpeg)

[**Kiev Class**](http://www.military-today.com/navy/kiev_class.htm)

These ships are the most recognized and probably the most successful
examples of Soviet Aviation Cruisers. Historically the four ships of the
class never operated at the same time due to a myriad of problems, but
in *Northern Fury* they do and are distributed evenly between the North
and Pacific Fleets. The ***Kiev*** Class represent a substantial leap in
technology, doctrinal development and capability over the ***Moskva***,
actually calling it a single class is a stretch as there are significant
difference between ships as development continued. When built, their
44,000 tons was far larger than anything else in the Soviet Navy, even
the nuclear powered

***Kirov*** class Battlecruisers. In addition to carrying more than a
dozen helicopters, this class introduced fixed wing VTOL (Vertical Take
Off and Landing) aircraft to the Soviet air groups.

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image7.jpeg)

The [Yak-38
Forger](https://defenceoftherealm.wordpress.com/2014/07/07/sea-harrier-frs-1-vs-yak-38-forger/),
the Soviet’s first production VTOL aircraft was not nearly as capable as
its contemporary, the Sea Harrier. However, the 20 examples held on
board the ***Kiev*** class gave Soviet Commanders something they had
never had before: ready and available fixed wing air power. The main
armament of these ships, however, was their missile battery, composed of
16 long range [P-500
Bazalt](https://fas.org/nuke/guide/russia/theater/ss-n-12.htm) (SS-N-12
Sandbox, 4 twin launchers and a full reload) and over 100 short and
medium range SAMs (Surface to Air Missiles).

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image8.jpeg)

These were important and powerful ships but the missiles, combined with
an impressive C2 and ASW suite, was let down by the poor performance of
the Yak-38, which was unable to fulfil the air protection task. Indeed,
many felt that this class of ship did not properly fit into its
assigned [role](https://ukdefencejournal.org.uk/kiev-class-cruiser-carrier-hybrid-flawed-design-ahead-time/)
at all, since it tried to do too many things in one hull. However,
*Northern Fury* being an alternative history has some licence to change
the narrative, and in our world the [Yak-141
Freestyle](http://www.military-today.com/aircraft/yak_141.htm) has
reached production status and has joined the fleet in small numbers. You
will find the ***Kiev*** and the much-improved ***Baku*** operating in
the Red Banner Northern Fleet, while ***Minsk*** and ***Novorossiysk***
operate out of Vladivostok in the Pacific.

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image9.jpeg)

[**Kuznetsov
Class**](http://www.military-today.com/navy/kuznetsov_class.htm)

Far closer to the classic aircraft carrier, the ***Kuznetsov*** is
still, at its core, an Aviation Cruiser. Armed with a dozen [P-700
Granit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P-700_Granit) (SS-N-19 Shipwreck)
anti-ship missiles in vertical launch tubes and over 250 short and
medium range SAMs, the ship's air group could almost be considered
secondary. In *Northern Fury* as in the real world, the ***Admiral
Kuznetsov*** is based in the Northern Fleet. His sister ship, the
***Varyag***, was launched in the Crimea in 1988, and towed to Murmansk
in 1992. At the start of the war the ***Varyag*** is apparently still
being completed.

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image10.jpeg)

The air wing of this carrier has been in flux since it was launched,
mostly because carrier aircraft development started to lag in the late
1980s. Several types, including the
[MiG-29K](http://www.deagel.com/Combat-Aircraft/Mig-29K_a000357003.aspx),
and the [Su-33](http://www.military-today.com/aircraft/su_33.htm), are
far superior to any other Soviet ship-borne aircraft to date. Despite
these new airframes, and with the Yak-38, Yak-141,
and [Su-25UTG](http://www.redstar.gr/Foto_red/Eng/Aircraft/Su_25UTG.html)
used for training embarked, Soviet naval air groups were always a
disappointing mix both in numbers capability. In *Northern Fury*, some
of these problems are wished away; the Su-33 was developed on time and
in adequate numbers while the MiG-29K proved a capable ground attack
platform. Although the standard air group may change over the course of
the *Northern Fury* campaign, at the outbreak of the war the ***Admiral
Kuznetsov’s*** air wing consists of the following:

-   24x Su-33 air superiority fighters in two squadrons

-   8x [Ka-27PL](http://www.military-today.com/helicopters/kamov_ka27_helix.htm)
    ASW Helicopters

-   2x Ka-27PS Search and Rescue (SAR) Helicopters

-   3x [Ka-31RLD](http://www.military-today.com/helicopters/kamov_ka31.htm)
    Airborne Early Warning (AEW) Helicopters

-   **Not embarked**: 12x MiG-29K for ground attack tasks and
    replacement

-   **Not embarked**: 4x Su-25UTG for training

![](/assets\images\blog\post14\image11.jpeg)

So, in summary, the Soviet carriers were designed generally as support
platforms to defend surface and submarine forces, rather than to act as
the heart of power-projecting strike groups. However, countries rarely
get to fight the wars they wish in the ways they intend, and these
platforms find new roles and unexpected strengths in *Northern Fury*,
though their weaknesses and eccentricities remain as well.
