**Northern Fury \#40 – Tongs**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Feb 2020</u>**

One mostly empty weekend coming up, therefore...

**SITUATION**

After weeks of fighting, we're pressing the fight to the Soviets now,
aiming to move north and cut off the flow of their troops and supplies
through northern Norway. To do this, we've been given control of a
mighty carrier group, with two full CVNs, three powerful Aegis cruisers
plus a Leahy, and a pleasing number of frigates and destroyers. With so
many SAMs around I'd almost welcome a large bomber raid! (Almost, mind
you...) We've also got three modern SSNs at sea, an SSK along the shore,
and useful MPA support from Nimrods and P-3s in re-captured Iceland and
Kinloss. The one thing we haven't been given is missiles. TLAMs are
non-existent, and Phoenixes, and AMRAAMs are in very short supply.

The Soviet surface fleet is essentially out of commission, barring a
possible patrol boat or two, but their submarines are still a very
credible threat. Their long-ranged bomber force took horrible casualties
in earlier fighting, and I suspect it won't make a significant
appearance now. Intel reports indicate that their fighters in the region
are primarily MiG-23s, with some Flankers, Foxbats, and very capable
MiG-31s to leaven the mix. Their SAMs are as vicious and nasty and
plentiful as ever. My targets are series of command and transportation
infrastructure facilities, some of which are exceptionally well
hardened. Enemy-held airbases and SAM sites are entirely secondary to
these objectives.

**PLAN**

My carrier group will make a slight turn to port, and continue north,
paralleling the Norwegian coast while remaining well out to sea. We
could close some, and still remain within our mission guidelines, but I
don't see any advantage to it. My attack planes have good long ranges,
and I think distance is still my friend.

My MPA are currently deployed on a series of four missions which cover
most of the Norway-Greenland gap, but that leaves the carrier group
exposed as it continues north, where it will be dependent on its own ASW
/assets. This makes me uncomfortable, and one group of American P-3s
(with their excellent VLAD sonobuoys) is assigned to patrol a zone
covering the carrier's path. The other MPA are ordered to spread out and
stretch a little further to cover the gap. Hopefully there won't be
major groups of transiting subs to catch, because the coverage will be
very thin.

Enemy air cover from the MiG-23s doesn't concern me greatly, and I'm
confident that I can handle them and the MiG-25s with a combination of
Sparrows and jammers. The Su-27s and MiG-31s are a different story, and
my dwindling supply of Phoenixes will be reserved for them. Hopefully it
will be enough. A Mig-31 popping up into a brace of A-6s could be
ruinous. I'm tempted to push my ELINT and AWACS out ahead, but I'll have
to be careful, because long-ranged supersonic dashes by Foxbats and
Foxhounds could be very dangerous to exposed units.

I'm definitely worried about hitting my targets with short-ranged
weapons, in what is likely to be a very dangerous SAM environment. I
don't have my normal swarm of TLAMs to soak up the missiles in advance,
and I have to deliver LGB attacks from an altitude that will make me
plainly obvious. I think I will need to make a first strike at the
outer, softer targets (docks, tunnels, and minelaying), hopefully assess
and stress the local defences somewhat, and then revisit the heavily
hardened command and logistics bunkers with my full force. Past
experience has shown that those will need repeated hits from heavy
weapons to make any impression on them at all.

Well, let's see what happens!

---

SIR! Permission to make munitions expenditure report, SIR!

Expenditure of Alpha-India-Mike-Fife-Fower-Charlie Phoenix air to air
missiles: 41 rounds.

-   Nineteen MiG-31 Foxhound destroyed, SIR!

-   Three Su-27 Flanker destroyed, SIR!

Respectfully suggest Su-27 engagement was at a tactically critical time.
Report will be updated after second strike wave is completed.

Request signoff, SIR!

(This board really needs a good salute emoji)

----

**INITIAL RECONAISSANCE AND PROBES**

**Towards Bodo**

As my AWACS and ELINT planes spread out and arrive on station they start
reporting numerous MiG-23s patrolling over the mainland, usually staying
15 to 20 miles inland, over the outer airbases (Bodo, Andoya, and
Tromso). There’s also a flight of Flankers up over Bardufoss in the
center, and three jammer patrols, and a Mainstay lurking further inland
over northern Norway. It looks like our target area is heavily defended
on the northern side, but Bodo is far enough south of it that there
seems to be a gap there.

The CAG evaluates the situation, and decides to send a sweep of F-18s in
the general direction of Bodo and our target, to try and provoke a
response. The first thing they learn is that Bodo’s got Su-27s, not just
the MiG-23s intelligence reported, and they’re covered by an SA-10 too.
The Flankers come out to fight, and three are shot down, but the
patrolling Floggers refuse to come out of their SAM cover, giving us the
hairy Russian finger as they orbit in safety.

**Up North**

Meanwhile, my northern /assets start reporting Badger jammers over the
ocean north of Norway, along with MiG-31 radars half-way to Svaalbard.
Is this a signal that the Russians are going to be forming up a bomber
strike after all? A flight of F-14s is diverted north, finding and
killing a Badger, before bumping into four Foxhounds, killing two of
them, and then running away. AWACs starts reporting other large aircraft
in the area, heading west into the passage between Svalbard and
Greenland. Whatever the Soviets are up to, they’re devoting some
significant /assets to it.

Operating on the general principle that if the enemy thinks it’s worth
doing, then we think it’s worth breaking, more flights of F-14s are sent
north, with S-3 tankers to help them along. This leads to a series of
engagements with MiG-31s, Tu-22 recce planes, and Badger jammers. My
pilots start taking to heading far north, radar off and out of enemy
radar cover, and trying to pick on the Badgers as they get to their
furthest points. This can have its downside, as one F-14 finds out when
it turns on its radar to Sparrow an approaching Badger, and finds
there’s a pair of angry MiGs another 30 miles behind it…

I start to wonder if I really need to be up here at all. Am I maybe
bumping into the edges of the Russian strategic bastion defences? If
that’s true, then I don’t need to worry about attack from this
direction. After several hours the air activity seems to taper off just
before dawn, and I discontinue the patrols for the moment.

**Back down South**

Plenty has been happening in the south during the northern fighting.

As my fighter sweeps move about, into and towards our target area, and
up along the coast, they start getting a better look at the defences.
There’s at least one SA-10 covering the target zone, plus a surveillance
radar that generally goes with an SA-11 (not counting the one covering
Andoya), and when the SA-10 starts pitching missiles at me, it becomes
clear that they’re alert and angry.

My strike planes are mostly loaded with penetrator weapons at the
moment, but the two hardened targets are the ones that are closest to
the SAMs, and I don’t think I can get there safely. I could probably get
at the softer transportation targets in the south, but I don’t want to
waste my limited supply of penetrator warheads on them. Therefore, a
decision is made to stand down the strike and re-arm. The A-6s will load
up with LGBs using conventional Mk84 warheads, for maximum destructive
effect on docks and roads. The F-18s will almost entirely load up with
HARMs, to tackle the SAMs, and a few SLAMs and Mavericks will be brought
along for contingency targets. This re-org will take another six hours,
which puts the strike launch time at approximately 03:00 hrs local.

As the reloading commences, more fighter sweeps along the coast get a
few MiG-23s, but then a pair of MiG-31s pops up out of Bardufoss, which
is the general signal to run away and holler for the F-14s. The
Foxhounds are on a high-Mach afterburner charge, and plotting their
courses shows they’re headed straight for two of my AEW planes, who
immediately start diverting everyone to their defence. Phoenix shots
manage to cut the corner, and the Foxhounds are downed before they can
get into range.

More probes towards Bardufoss prompt several more sets of MiG-31s to
come out, as well as some isolated MiG-25s, repeatedly pushing me back,
and preventing me from getting at the MiG-23s which are annoyingly
provocative near Andoya. I usually manage to kill the big MiGs, but the
occasional appearance of Su-27s from Bardufoss is a tougher target, and
they often get away safely, scraping me off on their SAM defences as
they retire. (I suppose I should have let them come further out to sea.)

The Soviets are also making some noise at sea, where the Boston briefly
picks up a distant CZ target, but loses it almost immediately. About an
hour later the Boston hears it again. It’s very deep, and its moved
about thirty knots (assuming it went in a straight line), and is already
south of the Boston, headed in the general direction of the carrier
group. This is probably an Alfa, and there’s no way the Boston can catch
it, so the Boston comes to periscope depth, sticks up a mast, and calls
the P-3s. When the P-3s arrive, they confirm that it’s an Alfa dashing
at a full 42 knots (they can nearly hear it in the airplane), but it’s
too deep for their torpedoes. They finally have to call in a Nimrod,
which manages to get a hit after the third head-on BOL drop. At those
depths, one hit is enough, and the little sub makes the long dive to the
ocean floor.

**FIRST ATTACK 03:00 HRS LOCAL**

There’s some more air-to-air fighting along the coast, but by the small
hours of the morning most of my planes are on their way back to the
carrier.

**Inbound**

The strike begins launching shortly after 03:00 local, and it’s massive,
taking all my strike aircraft and most of my fighters and jammers.
Leading fighters start skirmishing with the enemy, holding off a
succession of MiG-23s that start pouring out of Bodo in the south, while
the main strike angles in towards the transport targets. It looks like
most of the Foxbats and Foxhounds from Bardufoss are already dead, thank
heavens, but some of the Su-27s are still active. Two come charging in
at my stream of HARM-carrying F-18s, forcing my Tomcat pilots to brave
the wrath of the CNO and engage them with Phoenixes, downing them before
they can engage.

As the F-18s approach they fire some exploratory HARM shots at the
surveillance radar near the SA-10, and then things really start to
happen. Not only does the SA-10 open fire at my approaching planes, it
turns out there isn’t just one SA-11 in the area, there are actually
three of them, and one of them is close enough to cover the dock
targets. The Hornets fire the bulk of their HARMs at the SA-10, then a
salvo of six at the closest SA-11, and a couple more at the other
batteries. The closest battery dies, as does the surveillance radar, the
SA-10 is wounded, losing both its radars, and the other two SA-11s are
left largely intact.

While my A-6s close in on their targets, a pair of MiG-23 leakers from
Bodo force them to briefly haul off from the road targets, until some
F-18s can dash in and shoot them down. After that, the strikes proceed
in fine form, as the 2,000 lb LGBs smash the piers and collapse the road
tunnels, and the A-6s turn for home at low altitude. Moments later a
pair of F-18s with Mavericks and night vision pods pass down the length
of the ferry channel, looking for local defences, before the next set of
A-6s fly in and lay a string of mines in the water.

Now that the major SAM defences are down, some A-6s press further north
to fire SLAMs at the radio mast and telephone exchange, while F-18s fire
SLAMs at the two SA-11s, hoping to eliminate them while most of their
missiles have been used. The communications targets are completely
destroyed and the SAMs take hits, but they aren’t entirely eliminated.
It turns out there are more point defence SAMs down there than I had
spotted, and it takes some risky Maverick shots to get rid of the second
SA-11.

In all the commotion, some of my F-18s push through to the eastern edge
of the mountains, and head north, savaging the unarmed Su-24s and
MiG-25s on jammer and ELINT duty. For a moment it looks like they might
have a clear path to the Mainstay that’s been lurking in the background,
but then ESM picks up MiG-25 fighter radars launching out of Banak ahead
of them, and they prudently decide to turn around. (Back on deck the CAG
congratulates them on their initiative, and asks, oh, by the way, did
you realize you were violating the territorial integrity of the neutral
state of Sweden? The shamefaced pilots admit they missed that small
detail, blaming the fading border lines on their map, and volunteer for
internment in the land of striking blonde women. The CAG is not
impressed…)

**Outbound**

Once the strike aircraft are finished, they head back for the carrier,
but the heavy fighter screen remains in the area to pick on targets of
opportunity. They still can’t get at most of the northern CAP, in its
protective SAM umbrella, but some planes do try and come out to
intercept, and my pilots use their numerical superiority to good
advantage. Some of the MiG-23s seem to have chaff made of ground
horseshoes and pixie-dust (one decoys 7 Sparrows), but numbers tell in
the end.

Once the skies look clear, the fighters turn for home, and by 06:00
local they are back on the carrier and making their reports.

**NEXT STEPS**

The strike successfully destroyed its targets, but it also revealed an
imposing number of SAM systems in the area.

I need to get at the two hardened bunker targets to the east of Evenes
airbase, but there’s an SA-10 and an SA-12 and something medium ranged
(SA-6? SA-4?) only 15 to 20 miles to the north, so high-altitude
approaches are out of the question. HARM barrages might do the trick,
but I’ve already used a large number of them. Going in low seems to be
the natural alternative, following the fjord right to the targets, but
that would take me past the two SA-8s and the SA-15 (and the wounded
SA-11) that were found at Evenes. Who knows what we didn’t find?

The planners plan while the ordnance guys reload, and the pilots try and
grab some rest. The next strike starts at noon.

**SECOND STRIKE, 12:00 HRS local**

Re-arming continued for the rest of the morning, while AWACS units
continued to monitor the ongoing Soviet CAPs flying over the occupied
Norwegian airbases. No further activity was detected over the north
ocean, and there were no signs of additional Soviet submarines. At this
point there didn't seem to be any particular need to advance closer to
the Russian bomber airbases, so half an hour before noon the carrier
group reversed course, to parallel the Norwegian coast in a southerly
direction, retracing the route it had already travelled.

**Inbound**

The strike procedure was similar to the last one, although the total
quantity of escorting fighters was reduced. Strikers were divided into
two main groups; A-6s with LGBs to attack the headquarters, and F-18s
with LGBs to attack the SSM storage facility. HARM-carrying aircraft
were prepared for two major salvoes against the SA-10 and SA-12 which
had previously been spotted north of Evenes, and aircraft with SLAMs and
Mavericks were tasked to perform follow-up strikes against damaged air
defences after the HARM strike.

The mission went reasonably smoothly. Like before, the biggest challenge
was from the defenders at Bardufoss, who sortied a pair of Su-27s to
engage the incoming raid. This time the F-14s didn't hesitate, and
engaged them quickly with Phoenixes, getting a lamentable 1 kill for 4
shots, before F-18s with AMRAAMs finished off the last defender. The
remaining MiG-23s in the area had little chance in the face of NATO
fighter superiority, and quickly fell to AMRAAMs and Sparrows. HARM
barrages stunned first the SA-10, then the SA-12, allowing the bombers
to streak in low over the mountains (swinging wide to the SE around the
defences at Evenes) and destroy their hardened targets, while my
remaining attackers worked over the crippled air defences from the
safety of high altitude.

**Outbound**

As my attack planes turned to head for home, the SEAD forces reported
that they still had a modest number of HARMs and SLAMs left, so they
were diverted towards Andoya. That outlying coastal airbase, guarded by
SA-11s, had definitely been an obstacle to my freedom of movement. The
SLAMs were fired along the spine of the island, popping over the hills
at the same time as the HARMs arrived, and they managed to kill both
SA-11s there, as well as a pair of short-ranged missile batteries.

After that, the attack force withdrew, heading back to the carrier in a
large stream. A few MiG-23s tried to intercept (out of Andoya, no less),
but loitering fighters on 'backstop' missions were able to cut them off
before they could do any damage. By 15:30 hours local the strike was
back on the carriers, standing down and reloading for general purpose
duties.

**ENDGAME**

No further offensive activities were undertaken until the end of the
scenario. Soviet CAP continued to fly over their airbases (albeit in
reduced numbers in Andoya and Bardufoss), but no further activity was
detected north of Norway, or at sea.

I expended 45 Phoenixes for 23 kills, which is a reasonable 50% kill
rate, and I still have 87 Phoenixes left in the fleet. Most of them are
on aircraft, and have taken at least one ride through the smash-and-bash
of a carrier landing, so reliability can't be great. AMRAAMs are
comfortable at 125, and Sparrow-Ps are over 200, although Sparrow-Ms are
down to 78. I should be able to hold my own against the damaged Soviet
airpower in the region.

All my assigned targets were hit and destroyed, but ground-attack
weapons stockpiles are diminishing. I've used over half of my HARMs and
SLAMs, and my stockpile of large penetrator warheads (BLU-109s) is also
down by half. Some cross-leveling between the carriers would be needed
to even things out. In this condition, the two carriers could mount one
more heavy alpha strike, but after that they will be most suitable for
medium-duty support work, until they can be resupplied.

Thanks for another very enjoyable scenario.

**THOUGHTS ON THE SCENARIO**

The scenario ran smoothly for me, and the situation and objectives were
clear and well defined. It was interesting to try and probe at the
enemy's defences, and figure out where things were. I find that the
'exploration' phase of the game is often the most thought-provoking and
engaging. I think if a player rushes in immediately here, using the
loadouts they start with, they could get into some trouble if they try
to push deeply into SAM and CAP zones to get at those hardened targets
in the interior. Taking the time for some reconnaissance, eating away at
the better enemy fighters, and reloading for large HARM salvoes
certainly paid off for me.

I definitely thought the Russians were up to something in the North,
with all those jammers, recce planes, and MiGs north of Norway, so that
diverted some of my resources. What are they actually doing? Is it
actually the edge of the SSBN bastion? I never did meet the Akula, since
I didn't send the carriers that far north, and my SSK sailed up along
the coast towards Andoya, so it left the Tango behind and never spotted
it either. Similarly, I never found the two enemy cargo ships anchored
off northern Norway. What role are they supposed to play? Lures?

I realized after the game that I could have used my TALDs better. I
fired a couple at SAM sites late in the game, and, as expected, the
enemy ignored them. However, it did prompt some MiGs to try and
investigate them. Maybe I could have used them earlier, to draw CAP
flights out from their SAM cover in the Andoya and Bodo area? I'll have
to try that next time.

The Phoenix limitation was definitely fun to play, and several times I
found myself getting into risky situations because I didn’t want to pull
the trigger on a million-dollar missile. Production rate increased to 40
per month, you say. Wow…
