**Royal Navy Amphibious **

[**HMS Ocean (L12)**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HMS_Ocean_\(L12\))

Historically this ship was proposed in 1992, ordered in 93, laid down in
94, launched in 95 and commissioned in 98. For Northern Fury however,
that timeline is advanced to where she will be commissioned in March of
1994. The three years of fitting out was reduced to two and she was
launched in March of 1992. This LPH (Landing Platform, Helicopter),
while only marginally larger than the Fearless Class, is substantially
more capable and modern. She carries four small landing craft (LCVPs)
and up to 18 helicopters in order to land the 830 Royal Marines that can
be embarked.

![](/assets/images/nato/uk/navy/amphibious/image1.jpg)

[**Fearless
Class**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fearless-class_landing_platform_dock)

The core element of the Royal Navy’s amphibious capability resides with
the two Fearless Class LPDs (Landing Platform Docks). Both have had long
and busy careers with the highlight for both being the amphibious
operations to retake the Falkland Islands in 1982. ***HMS
Fearless(L10)*** underwent and extensive refit in the late ‘80s,
recommissioning in 1991, while historically ***HMS Intrepid(L11)*** was
then decommissioned and did not undergo this refit – in Northern Fury
she does. ***Intrepid*** went to dry-dock in early 1991 and emerged in
Nov of 1993 where she was structurally repaired as well as being fitted
with 20 mm BMARC and Phalanx CIWS guns, new communications suites and
better accommodation. Both ships are home ported at Portsmouth.

![](/assets/images/nato/uk/navy/amphibious/image2.jpg)

[**Round Table or Sir Lancelot
Class**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Round_Table-class_landing_ship_logistics)

These six LSL (Landing Ship Logistics) are operated by the Royal Fleet
Auxiliary (RFA) and are not strictly amphibious assault ships. They can
offload across a beach via their front loading ramp, but are not
designed for assaulting the beach. One of the six, ***RFA Sir Galahad***
was sunk during the Falklands campaign and has been replaced by a newer
and slightly larger ship of the same name. They can transport 400 troops
comfortably and over 500 for short durations, and a mix of vehicles
including up to 12 Main Battle Tanks and/or over 100 land rovers.
Vehicles can be replaced 46 cargo containers as required. Although they
cannot support an embarked helicopter, they have two landing decks, one
for a Sea King size or smaller aft, and another for a CH-47 or smaller
amidships. They have both a front and rear loading ramp.

![](/assets/images/nato/uk/navy/amphibious/image3.jpeg)Sir Galahad
II, slightly larger than the original ships

| Pennant | Name           | Status | Remarks                         |
| ------- | -------------- | ------ | ------------------------------- |
| L3004   | Sir Bedivere   | Refit  |                                 |
| L3005   | Sir Galahad II | Active | New, launched in 1987           |
| L3027   | Sir Geraint    | Active |                                 |
| L3029   | Sir Lancelot   | Active | Not sold in 89                  |
| L3036   | Sir Percivale  | Active |                                 |
| L3505   | Sir Tristram   | Active | Badly damaged in 82 and rebuilt |

![](/assets/images/nato/uk/navy/amphibious/image4.jpg)[**LCU
Mk.9**](http://www.navypedia.org/ships/uk/brit_aws_lcu9r.htm)

Landing Craft Utility (LCU) are the workhorses of the amphibious fleet.
Each of the LPDs carry four of these small craft in their well deck, and
in turn the LCUs carry either one tank, four large vehicles or 120 Royal
Marines ashore. 14 LCUs are in service as one, from ***HMS Fearless***
was sunk by and Argentinian Air attack during the Falklands war, and has
not been replaced. Four are on each of the LPDs, four more at Pool for
training and 2 are deployed on various tasks.

[**LCVP Mk5**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LCVP_\(United_Kingdom\))

In addition to the LCUs, each of the LPDs and HMS Ocean carry four LCVP
(Landing Craft, Vehicle & Personnel) on davits. All older RN LCVPs have
been replaced by the Mk5 which provides more capability than the older
models. An entire Royal Marine company (140 troops) can be transported
in four LCVPs which can carry 38 troops (including 3 crew) or a light
vehicle up to 210 nautical miles. In total 18 are in service with the RN
plus four older Mk4s are used by the
Army.

![](/assets/images/nato/uk/navy/amphibious/image5.jpg)

![](/assets/images/nato/uk/navy/amphibious/image6.jpeg)[**RHIB**](http://www.eliteukforces.info/uksf-gear/ribs/)

Most RN RHIBs (Ridged Hull Inflatable Boat) are of the 7 Meter variety,
they can carry 15 troops at more than 40 Knots speed. Generally unarmed.
Dozens are in service, some with modifications and because the basic
boat is available commercially, this can be expanded to hundreds at very
short notice.

[**RRC**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rigid_Raider)

The Ridged Raiding Craft (RRC), pre dates the RHIB by several decades
but accomplishes the same task. Available in two sizes, 6.5 and 8
meters, these are widely used by both the RN and the Royal Marines to
carry a crew of 3 and 8 fully equipped troops. Speed varies from 33 up
to 50 knots depending on load. Dozens of these boats are available at
every RN Base and they can be found in use on every ship.

![](/assets/images/nato/uk/navy/amphibious/image7.jpg)
