**Baltic Fury \#2 â€“ Borscht on Bornholm**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ June 2020</u>**

I've finally found some time to give this one a try, so here goes!

**SITUATION**

We're up in the Baltic, and HQ has ordered us to oversee the seizure of
the island of Bornholm, by airdrop and amphibious landing. Our large
amphibious fleet is currently loading in the Kaliningrad area, behind
two lines of screening ASW patrol boats operating across the mouth of
Gdansk Bay. Out to sea we have a strong surface group based around the
cruiser Grozny, and several smaller groups of missile boats, ASW patrol
craft, ASW frigates, and minesweepers en-route to the Bornholm area.
I've also got a number of diesel subs around Bornholm. Only one is a
modern Kilo, but even the old Foxtrots and Romeos could be useful if a
ship comes their way. Against NATO subs, however, they're probably going
to be flaming (bubbling?) datums. Air /assets (aside from the
paratroopers' cargo planes) include a very nice force of modern
Flankers, good numbers of MiG-23s, and MiG-27s, plus assorted
reconnaissance, AEW, and ASW /assets.

The enemy's disposition is uncertain. The area is well within reach of
NATO air-power, but a lot of that may be tied up with heavy fighting in
Germany, so it's not certain how much will reach us. German
Kormoran-carrying Tornadoes will be a special concern. Surface forces
may show up, but we should be able to see them coming in time to counter
them. The main risk will be the swarm of NATO's almost-midget diesel
subs that are sure to be infesting the area. And the mines...

**THE PLAN**

Night has just fallen, and my attack planes are not night-vision
equipped. Realistically, any strikes and parachute landings will have to
wait for morning. In the meantime, my amphibs are ordered to complete
loading, form a tight convoy, and begin heading for Bornholm, escorted
by ASW patrol craft and mine-sweeping helicopters. My major surface
group will hurry south to meet them, and provide SAM cover from expected
air attacks, while land-based ASW helicopters and MPA sweep their
transit lane for subs.

Lesser naval forces (forward ASW patrols and missile boats) will do
their best to operate in the approaches to Bornholm. They are
essentially defenceless against aircraft or anti-shipping missiles, so
Flankers and MiG-23s are assigned to provide some cover. I would prefer
to reserve most of my planes for decisive action, so the CAP will have
to be light to begin with. I am most concerned about the survivability
of my minesweepers, which will need to operate unsupported and within
sight of the shore for an extended period. They will be most vulnerable
of all.

Bombardment of Bornholm is expected to begin at first light, with
parachute assaults and amphibious landings scheduled to follow in the
early afternoon, after my attack planes are ready for a second wave. I
don't anticipate too much resistance on Bornholm itself, but there are
sure to be counter-strikes as my forces arrive in the theatre and after
they have landed.

**OPENING NIGHT**

**Sub clashes, Part 1**

Operations begin with CAP, surveillance, and ASW aircraft lifting off
and heading for their stations, while ships and submarines slow to creep
and listen for nearby foes.

Almost immediately, the captain of the S-212, a Romeo class sub, is
startled to get a contact on a fast-moving sub 6 miles to his N, moving
at 16 knots. There's no way he can catch it, even at flank speed, and
he'd only deafen himself and make an absurd amount of noise if he tried,
so he sticks up an antenna, contacts the Krivak that's operating in his
region, and radios in a spotting report. Minutes later an SS-N-14 is
dropping an ASW torpedo on the contact, and after a few close passes
there is a satisfying thud, and the NATO sub (the Unicorn, a very modern
British boat) settles lifelessly on the Baltic sea floor.

It's only a few minutes later that the ASW patrol group operating NE of
Bornholm detects incoming torpedoes - this time NATO saw us first! The
little ships scatter, turning to flee at flank speed, and blindly firing
ASW torpedoes over their shoulders along the bearing to the enemy
weapons. The incoming torpedoes are fast, but, fortunately, short
ranged, and they run out of fuel before they can reach my retiring
ships. As my captains swing about to re-engage they hear another
explosive thud, as one of their torpedoes hits something. They continue
to search the area cautiously, but find nothing, and they tentatively
write it up as a kill. (Postwar records show that this was the patrol
area for the Danish sub Nordkaperen.)

**Bornholm Recce**

By this point my reconnaissance aircraft are starting to get a better
picture of the theatre. There's a single surveillance radar radiating in
the centre of Bornholm, a very slow moving aerial contact over the
island, possibly some sort of drone, and a surface contact west of the
island, moving further west at 12 knots. There's the possibility that
this could be a civilian ferry, or something like that, but a close pass
by a recce Su-24 reveals it to be a minelayer. Probably empty by now,
dammit...

My SEAD Fitters (which can work quite happily in the darkness) arrive at
this point, and destroy the surveillance radar with a single well-placed
ARM. The Su-24 swings around to make a low-level high-speed pass over
Bornholm itself, trusting in speed and darkness to keep it safe. A
Stinger gunner proves that to be unwise, wrecking the port engine, but
the plane manages to get home and report. Analysis of the tapes and
footage shows no signs of ships or aircraft at the port and airfield,
which is a relief, and although there are some indications of ground
units, there don't seem to be any major SAM sites or anti-shipping
missile batteries. (Unless they're still hiding.)

Meanwhile, my distant shore-based Sepal missile batteries have fired a
single shot at the minelayer, and when the massive missile finally
arrives it plunges in towards the isolated target, and promptly
malfunctions and misses completely. Fortunately, the minelayer turned on
its radars to try and shoot down the Sepal, which allows the Fitters to
fire a pair of ARMs at it. Those do not malfunction, and the hits start
a fierce fire, which soon brings the wounded listing ship to a halt. It
eventually burns out and sinks during the night.

NATO doesn't seem to be sending any aircraft into the region (other than
the Bornholm drone, which is swiftly shot down), and my advancing ELINT
MiG-25s and Bears approach the western limits of our area of operation.
The Bear's radar operator spots a German frigate operating alone near
the Neustadt naval base, but there don't seem to be any other NATO ships
at sea yet. The ELINT planes also pick up the strong emissions of NATO
AWACS planes, operating safely within their airspace, and ground based
radars too. These are all beyond my assigned AO, and probably amid
fierce fighting, so there's nothing I can do about them. I have to
accept that my operations will be under observation the whole time.

**Sub clashes, Part 2**

NATO doesn't want my southern ASW group to feel left out, and they're
fired on by torpedoes too. The captains know the drill, and they turn to
flee while firing torpedoes, but this time the results are inconclusive.
I manage to outrun the enemy torpedoes, which are slower but
longer-ranged than the ones I encountered in the north, but none of my
shots hit either. My ships turn around to start hunting again, but
initially they find nothing.

Since NATO doesn't seem to be sending fighters into the region, it seems
safe to send a Be-12 ASW plane into the area to assist. When it arrives
and turns on its radar it immediately gets a small contact, which is
much too far away to be the sub which fired on my ASW group. Another sub
snorkelling? Floating garbage? The Be-12 abandons the ASW group and
flies over to investigate, soon gets a sonobuoy contact on some sort of
SS, and gleefully pounces on it and kills it with a single torpedo.

Meanwhile the other sub fires on the ASW group again, forcing me to flee
and fire defensively once more. The Be-12 comes hurrying back, and picks
up the submarine contact with a sonobuoy, just in time to hear one of my
defensively fired torpedoes home in and strike it. Four down!

**UPCOMING**

Four enemy subs sunk within the first hour and a half is a very
encouraging start. The worrying part is that the two subs which fired at
me were completely undetected by my ASW ships before they attacked. If
something like that happens to the amphibs, they won't be able to turn
and run like ASW corvettes - there will be hits. There are probably more
subs still out there, possibly along the route my amphibs have to travel
before they get to Bornholm. I think I'll need to adjust the ASW patrol
plans for my convoy, to provide more local direct screening on the route
of travel, rather than trying to do wide barrier lines.

The other thing I'm worried about is the lack of enemy air activity.
They've definitely spotted and ID-ed my aircraft as hostile, and even
shot AAA and SAMs at them, but so far there's been no attempt to
intercept me or give cover to Bornholm. I'd been hoping to start
whittling the enemy fighters down in air-to-air combat, where my
Flankers should have the range advantage, but I can't do that if they
won't come up to fight. The ungrateful rotters...

The operation continues...

**SMALL HOURS OF THE NIGHT**

**Naval and air operations**

As the main convoy gets underway, the screen of small ASW escorts is
brought closer in, and forms up in a series of small three-ship patrols
along the expected path of the convoy. These will hopefully be able to
stumble over any submarines en-route, before they can get close enough
to attack the amphibs. My Krivaks, which are currently operating
independently, are ordered to get closer to the vulnerable small craft
(minesweepers, ASW corvettes, amd missile boats) in the Bornholm area,
so they can react more quickly to air and sub threats to those
vulnerable /assets.

I also move some of my aircraft up into Polish airbases closer to
Bornholm. The four minesweeping helicopters go to Kolobrzeg, on the
Polish coast, and two flights of Flankers move in to Swidwin. They won't
have any munitions there, so they can't reload, but they will form an
emergency quick-reaction reserve that is hundreds of miles closer to the
expected combat zone than their current airbase.

**Sub Pincer**

NATO makes the next move, when another hidden sub fires a pair of
torpedoes at my ASW group north of Bornholm. The shots come in from the
west, and are aimed at the southern-most Parchim, which counterfires and
turns to run away. My torpedo doesn't hit anything, and theirs run out
of fuel, so the Parchim starts turning around to re-engage, when it's
suddenly fired on from the east. We're between two hostile subs!

Fortunately, the supporting Krivak has been closing in, and it's now
close enough to fire an SS-N-14 on the suspected sub position. It's a
good shot, and the unmistakeable sound of a detonating torpedo signals
the demise of the sub. Deprived of guidance updates, the incoming
torpedoes go into straight-line search mode, and the Parchim is able to
turn south and sprint out of their path, making it to safety by a few
hundred meters. (I'd never been a big fan of Krivaks before, but now I
see how they work. The little corvettes trip over the enemy, and the
Krivak immediately drops a torpedo on top of them from a safe distance.
Not bad...)

That still leaves the other sub, somewhere to the east, and the
corvettes form up to start hunting it again. They don't find much, until
a Be-12 flying boat arrives, and starts deploying sonobuoys. These soon
pick up the sound of an old Type 205, but it's frustratingly elusive,
and the sonar operators are having great difficulty pinpointing its
actual location. It's not until the first torpedo drop, on an incorrect
best-guess estimation, forces the sub to speed up to evade that they are
able to determine approximately where it is, and then the second torp
manages to make the kill.

**NATO Missile Boats**

As the dark hours continue, HQ passes on a warning that NATO is
preparing to make some sort of major air operation in the morning.
Fortunately, most of our fighters are ready and our pilots are well
rested, so we should be able to generate a strong surge to meet them in
the morning. The next warning is of an imminent threat; NATO missile
boats are surging from Danish harbours, and will be attacking shortly!

The radar operators on the orbiting Bear start calling in contacts
almost immediately. There seem to be three main packs of them: a group
of six up near Copenhagen, another half dozen down by the frigate we
spotted earlier, and a group of four in between. They're moving east
towards us, and they're almost in Harpoon range of our ASW groups near
Bornholm. Bold and decisive action is required. Run away!

My small ships all turn and dash for the cover of the nearby Krivaks,
hoping their SAMs will be able to knock down any incoming missiles, and
then they head east as fast as they can, trying to stay out of range of
enemy missiles. The situation is especially tense for my slow-moving
minesweepers, which had almost started sweeping on the east end of
Bornholm. The enemy are twice as fast as they are, and they have no hope
of escape in a long pursuit.

By now my various ELINT and ESM sensors have gotten a better idea of the
enemy's composition. The missile boats in the south are Gepards,
dripping with modern RAM missiles, and thus essentially immune to
anything short of a massive saturation attack. Fortunately, they've only
got short-ranged Exocets. The boats in the center and north, however,
are much more weakly defended, and they're the ones with long-range
Harpoon missiles. They are the primary target.

The distant cruiser Grozny arms its launchers, gets final coordinates
from the orbiting Bear, and starts firing massive Shaddock missiles at
the small missile boats. Then, as the missile boats get closer, the
shore-based Sepal batteries near Kaliningrad start adding their fire,
one missile per target at a time. A few shots malfunction, some get
decoyed by chaff, and one or two get knocked down by SAMs from the
German frigate, but those that hit blow the missile boats to fragments.
It may seem like overkill, but it works, and none of the missile boats
get within launch range.

I haven't fired a single shot at the well-defended Gepards, when the
radar operators on the Bear report that they seem to have turned around
and are headed SW, in the direction of Lubeck. If they're leaving (which
would make some sense, given the loss of 10 of their comrades) then I'm
content to let them go for the moment, since I had no effective way to
engage them. That only leaves the German frigate (now identified as the
Niedersachen), which has come far enough forward that it can be engaged
by my Kilo, which manages to torpedo it in absurdly shallow water, with
the sail barely awash.

**PRE-DAWN**

With dawn an hour away, I have a bit of a dilemma. I had hoped to get
some minesweeping done in the dark, but when I was driven away by the
missile boats, I lost that opportunity. Do I turn around west again, and
resume minesweeping and ASW patrols just as dawn breaks, artillery can
see me, and NATO's suspected air offensive arrives? Or do I continue to
pull back the small craft, make my own Bornholm air-strikes, and only
then resume naval operations around the island?

Staff are assigned to examine the options.

he invasion draws closer...

**NAVAL ACTIVITY**

Now that NATO's missile boats have retired, staff consider how to handle
our small ships near Bornholm. The decision is made to turn them around
towards Bornholm again, but not to rush them into position yet. We'll
let the first round of airstrikes resolve itself before moving in to
start minesweeping. In the mean time, the main amphibious force
continues to steam sedately along the Polish coast, about ten miles out,
screened by ASW patrol boats and preceded by the Grozny surface group.
They're in no rush yet, and are aiming to arrive at Bornholm in the
afternoon.

**DAWN STRIKE AT BORNHOLM**

As the skies lighten, the leading planes of a massive air strike arrive
over Bornholm from the east. Reconaissance Su-17s and Su-24s fly low
over the island, hunting for ground forces, and hoping to pinpoint the
infantry formations who have been firing Stingers at us during the
night. They manage to find plenty of Danish infantry and some of their
artillery (particularly along the NE side of the island), but Stingers
in the center of the island, and near the port of Ronne, keep forcing
the recce planes away.

The first of the MiG-27s arrive, and attempt to suppress the Stingers
and AAA with rockets. The nasty little creatures are essentially
invisible in the early light, and although we know the area where the
missiles are coming from, nobody can actually get eyes on them to make
an attack. How I wish I had FLIR! After several fruitless passes, and
damaging SAM hits, the attempt is called off, and the next wave of
MiG-27s is directed to attack the Danish forces deployed along the north
and eastern side of the island. This goes much better, and, with Su-17
recce planes acting as spotters, the MiGs begin to inflict crushing
blows on the infantry formations.

The Stingers can't be ignored, however. They must be dealt with before
the vulnerable paratroopers arrive this afternoon. So, once full
daylight arrives, the recce planes and MiGs make another attempt. This
time a combination of better light and dwindling Stinger magazines leads
to success. It takes multiple passes to spot the tiny hidden units (and
their 40mm AAA defenders), but they are gradually found and killed (or
at least run out of ammunition).

In the process of finding the Stingers, my recce planes also identify a
formation of armour and a couple of artillery batteries in the vicinity
of Ronne. The MiG-27s continue to fly in from the east, and the Su-17
FACs direct them to the new targets. Dozens of flights of MiGs sweep
over the island, until all identified enemy units have been attacked and
disrupted. In the end, some of the MiGs are sent home with their bombs,
while the recce Su-17s fly back and forth over the island at low
altitude, without drawing any return fire.

Overall, the attack has gone very well. Some of my planes are headed
home with shredded tailfeathers, or 40mm holes punched in the wing, and
a few sad examples are smoking craters on Bornholm, but my force of MiGs
is essentially intact. Surprisingly, NATO made no attempt at all to
intercept the attack, and my watchful Su-30 pilots patrolling nearby had
nothing to do during the entire strike. Of course, that just means all
of NATO's fighters will be perfectly intact when they hit our landing
forces later today...

**MINESWEEPING**

Once the Bornholm strike is over, and the Su-17s have confirmed nobody
else is shooting near the shore, minesweeping operations are ordered to
begin. The first to arrive are the helicopters from Kolobrzeg, who start
sweeping directly along the coast, nervously waiting for some hidden SAM
gunner to step out of a seaside bathing hut and put an end to their
lives. Nobody takes a shot (yet), and the helicopter crews fly down the
coast, drawing an impressive tail of explosions behind them. The Danes
definitely don't want anyone landing here!

The minesweepers arrive a few hours later, and join the fun, slowly
moving along the south coast, from east to west. It looks like the
helicopters are doing a good job, and most of the mines are already
gone, but the ships still find a few more. Most are immediately along
the shore, with only a few further out at sea.

**NATO ATTACKS!**

Mid-morning, we start getting a series of increasingly worrying reports
of heavy air fighting in the west. At first it sounds like our comrades
are holding their own, but then we start getting reports that our pilots
are falling back under pressure, and then that the front has essentially
collapsed. NATO's coming and they're loaded for Bear!

When the first reports come in, a couple of Flankers are despatched to
patrol the region, and forward-deployed light craft (missile boats and
ASW corvettes) are ordered to tighten up into air-defence formation,
closing in on their escorting Krivaks, and turn back east, hurrying to
get clearance from any incoming attack. The minesweepers, however, are
ordered to keep working at their vital task.

When the second report comes in I decide the sweepers better get out of
there too, and they turn around to close on their Krivaks and retire.
The four Flankers which are forward based at Swidwin get scrambled, as
well as about half the MiG-23s and distant Flankers, and when the third
report comes in the final surge of fighters get's launched. I've left
two flights of Flankers and one of MiG-23s at their bases, for later
convoy escort duties, but other than that everything is in the air.

NATO arrives with a surge of fighters from Laage, and an enormous swarm
of Tornadoes and F-16s from Denmark and northern Germany. The Laage
fighters are older F-4s, carrying modern AMRAAMs, and ex East German
MiG-29s, which we all agree is cheating. Those should be ours! My
forward-based Flankers from Swidwin prove to be essential here, along
with the first few arriving from the Riga area, and they manage to use
their long-ranged Alamo-Cs to knock down the Phantoms and drive back the
MiG-29s before they can launch.

As more planes pour into the area, a colossal firefight rages over the
shallow waters at the east end of the Baltic. At first, I hope my range
advantage should lead to a turkey-shoot against the helpless incoming
attackers, but my missiles suffer greatly against ultra-low-level
Tornadoes, and hit rates are not great. Plus, my SARH missiles are
limited to one shot at a time, and can't fire an AMRAAM-like salvo.
Before I know it, I'm in a desperate furball, trying to dash in and out
of heat-seeker range, without getting cut down by Sidewinders.
Meanwhile, additional fighters are trying to sneak in from Laage and
mess me up.

It looks like the enemy may be dividing into two streams, some possibly
headed for the swiftly retreating Tarantul missile boats north of
Bornholm, and others going for the plodding minesweepers, which are
trying to run for it in the south. I manage to kill off and drive back
the northern attack, which turns out to include some old Drakens. My
MiG-23 pilots, every one an aviation enthusiast, are delighted to see
these unique-looking old jets, and shed a sorrowful tear for every one
they mercilessly shoot down. Even one of my Su-24 recce planes (on ELINT
duty over Sweden) manages to swoop in from behind and get one with an
AA-8.

The southern fight doesn't go as well, with constant interference from
additional Laage fighters diverting my fighters from attacking the
Tornadoes. Most of my planes are attempting to disengage now, with
nothing but cannon-shells left on board, my last three inbound flights
of Flankers aren't quite in range yet, and the onrushing Tornadoes start
launching Kormorans at the minesweepers. Blast!

The Flankers dive on full afterburner to try and get between the ships
and the missiles, while the pair of Krivaks guarding the minesweepers
look anxiously for the incoming attackers. There may be two of them, but
only one of them has modern missiles that can hit the low-flying
anti-shipping missiles, and there are so many minesweepers to guard.
Their radars are still off. Should they risk activating them and getting
a HARM in return? Fingers hover anxiously over control panels, as the
operators wait for the commands.

The Flankers go roaring overhead, firing a stream of missiles at the
incoming Kormorans, and managing to knock them down in time, but this
leaves them in a very bad position. They're at low altitude, mostly out
of missiles, and facing the remaining planes of the enemy attack. They
have rescued the minsweepers, but who's going to rescue them? They fight
hard to make their escape, and the Krivaks and the flotilla open fire to
assist as the dogfight passes by, but not all of the Flankers go home
again.

**RETIRE AND REGROUP**

As my fighters head back to base, you can count the missiles they have
left on the fingers of one thumb. (Actually, not quite true. One MiG-23
still has an Apex left, but its radar has been wrecked by Sidewinder
fragments, so it can't use it.) NATO is still in pursuit, with a few
F-16s and Tornado F3s (with dangerous long-ranged missiles) trying to
get at my defenceless planes. But fortunately, we've got one more trick
to play...

Down below, cutting smartly through the waves, are the lean predatory
shapes of the Sovremenny destroyers, leading the amphibious convoy to
Bornholm. Their captains smile grimly as missile launchers elevate,
radars click on, and the highly trained crews press the firing keys to
launch their most advanced long-ranged missiles at the startled enemy
planes. They shoot! And shoot. And shoot and shoot and shoot. And shoot
some more. Finally, after ten shots they manage to get their first hit.
The admiral looks the other way, and pretends not to notice... Appalling
hit rates aside, the SAM fire does turn the enemy fighters away,
allowing my retiring fighters to complete their escape. The SAM gunners
seem to have the hang of it now, and get a couple more NATO planes, but
some remedial training seems to be in order.

Now that the attack is over, the minesweepers turn around again, and
hurry back to the minefield once more, hoping to get the job done before
the landing force arrives. The main amphibious convoy is only a few
hours away, and the hovercraft are setting out on their high-speed
journey from Kaliningrad, so they can't postpone the mine-clearing any
more. My fighters are landing to re-arm, and the Su-30 pilots are
surprised to learn that they are already running out of their
long-ranged missiles. They can reload with light loadouts of two AA-10
As, but that is all. (Despite the fact that I have plenty of Bs and Ds
left, the absence of Cs means Iâ€™m not allowed to use them. The inability
to use partial loadouts has always been a frustration.)

Meanwhile, more NATO air activity is detected, as additional F-16s,
Tornado F3s, and even some RF-4s lift off and start heading for the
Bornholm area. The fighters are probably drawn by my ELINT, ASW, and
minesweeping aircraft, which should be clearly visible on enemy radar,
but I'm not sure what the RF-4s are trying to accomplish. The F3s from
Nordholz are my main concern. Thankfully, I have two flights of Su-30s
held in reserve, and over the next couple of hours they do a good job
shooting down the enemy, which is much easier when they only come two at
a time at high altitude. Nonetheless, the F3s do manage to knock an
engine off a Be-12 that doesn't flee in time.

**LANDING**

The occupation of Bornholm happens in the mid-afternoon. A surge of
recce aircraft is the first to arrive, skimming back and forth over the
island at low altitude to look for any new military activity, while
flights of fighters and attack planes wait at high altitude to respond
to anything they discover. Fortunately, nothing shows up, and NATO
doesn't seem to mount an air or sea-based response.

Paratroop landings happen in the farmland NE of Ronne, dropping off an
artillery park, which remains stationary, while a large infantry
formation forms up and heads for the port. Half an hour later the
hovercraft arrive, with the Aists dropping off their troops in Ronne
itself, while the Pormorniks land theirs at the nearby airfield. The
main landing takes place across the broad beaches in the SE corner of
the island. There doesn't seem to be any opposition. Evidently the
shattering air-strikes in the morning have broken the enemy's will to
fight, and Bornholm is ours.

**FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS**

As the day continues, consolidation continues on Bornholm. The port and
airfield are occupied, and a heliport is constructed in the farmland
east of the airfield. There is still some mine-clearing to do (the
waters off the port of Ronne are infested with them), but that is well
in hand, and a few hours later the minesweepers turn and head back to
Kaliningrad.

Meanwhile, our short-ranged hovercraft are refuelling at Ronne, and the
long-range ones are headed south to Kolobrzeg, on the Polish coast,
where they refuel too, before heading back to Kaliningrad. The
amphibious task group continues to unload cargo, guarded by a screen of
patrolling ASW corvettes, and then they turn to head home as well.
Missile boats are refuelling in Poland, and readying themselves on the
coast in case NATO tries something with those Gepards, which are still
at sea near the Neustadt naval base.

The last act comes with the docking of the freighter Vilyuy in Ronne.
Its airfield equipment will allow us to send in some MiG-23s to be based
on the island.

With all this in place, success of the Soviet revolution is assured!
