**Danish Army**

The Danish army is roughly two divisions in size split into two distinct
regions. The Jutland Division in the west being dedicated to the NATO
Command of LANDJUT, the commander responsible for the defence of
Schleswig-Holstein Germany and the Jutland peninsula of Denmark. In the
east, largely on Zealand, the Corps level HQ becomes NATO’s LANDZEALAND
command defending the islands in the Baltic including Zealand, Fyn,
Bornholm and many others.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\dk\army\media\image1.png" style="width:6.90625in;height:2.49363in" />

**Leopard 1DK**

Denmark initially acquired 120 Leopard 1A3 in the 70’s and upgraded them
to the ‘A5’ level as well as purchasing a further 110 to replace its
aging Centurions in 1992. Historically the second order was filled from
surplus German Army stock as that force downsized – in Northern Fury
these were still required and not available from surplus so they are new
build tanks.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\dk\army\media\image2.jpg" style="width:5in;height:3.75in" />

**M41 DK**

Denmark was the last European country to still be using this post World
War Two light tank, with 41 examples providing armored support for the
‘Bornholm’ Battle Group. Although modernized and equipped with improved
fire control, a laser range finder and thermal site, better ammunition,
fire suppression system and defence against Nuclear, Biological, and
Chemical (NBC) threats; it was still an old tank. However, in theory the
only armed force these tanks would face if this isolated island was
invaded, would be the Soviet ‘PT-76’ light tank or perhaps airborne BMD
or amphibious BMP Infantry Fighting Vehicles, so the 76mm high velocity
gun and light armour would suffice.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\dk\army\media\image3.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.86875in" />

**M113**

The venerable M113 equipped the Danish mechanized Infantry force. Of the
636 in the force, approximately 530 were the standard Armoured Personnel
Carrier (APC) version, 50 of these were the new A2 DK version with a
25mm gun, a further 56 were the Anti-Tank variant with TOW missiles and
the remainder a mix of many other derivatives.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\dk\army\media\image4.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.06875in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\dk\army\media\image5.jpg" style="width:3.08333in;height:2.29306in" /><img src="/assets\images\nato\dk\army\media\image6.jpg" style="width:3.4375in;height:2.29444in" />
