**Caribbean Fury 1: Hot Tamale\!**

13 Feb 1994, 1300 Zulu, 0800 Local (0700 in the Gulf)

![A large ship in the ocean Description automatically generated with low
confidence](/assets/images/aar/cf/cf1/image1.jpeg)

You’re commanding the ***USS John F. Kennedy***
[CVBG](http://northernfury.us/nato/us/navy/carriers/jfk/) (Aircraft
Carrier Battle Group) on routine patrol in the Caribbean. Although the
official homeport of the flagship is Norfolk Virginia, the Battle Group
has been operating out of New Orleans Louisiana for most of the past
year due to the increased tensions in Central America. The air wing
(CVW-7) has just completed four days of intense training with the Army
up at Fort Hood, and you are now heading to Roosevelt Roads, Puerto
Ricco for some ASW (Anti-Submarine Warfare) and ASuW (Anti-Surface
Warfare \[naval\]) work.

You still haven’t decided if you’ll take the northern route past Cuba
along the Florida Strait, although these are very narrow waters, it
sends a message to the Cubans who’ve been getting uppity of late.
Otherwise you can take the southern route through the Straits of Yucatan
past the Cayman Islands and Jamaica and take a look at Venezuela, which
has also been flexing its muscles recently. Either way it should be a
pleasant evening with perfect Caribbean weather.

\----------------

**<span class="underline">Caribbean Fury \#1</span>** is a very intense
scenario with significant action early on as Cuba, supported by Soviet
advisors and visiting aircraft launch a surprise attack on Key West
Florida. The frenetic first few hours will likely see Cubans
successfully bombing the island base, but that will probably be their
high-water mark. US forces quickly rally and the process of pounding
Cuba into submission will commence on the following day.

Simultaneously key events are happening at sea, Guantanamo Bay and in
Panama. The British are also hard pressed in Belize which comes under
pressure from a Guatemalan sponsored uprising.

![Cuban Air Force - Cuban
Aviation](/assets/images/aar/cf/cf1/image2.jpeg)
