**Baltic Fury 2, Borsht on Bornholm.**

14 Feb 1994, 1800 Zulu, 1900 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\bf\bf2\media\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:2.77083in" />

In this scenario you are playing the Soviet side and are charged with
conducting an airborne and amphibious landing on Bornholm. NATO is on
the backfoot so this should be a quick and relatively simple operation,
but itâ€™s essential that the island is seized and secured rapidly to
allow for future operations.

You are Commander of the 27<sup>th</sup> Landing Ship Division and have
recently hoisted your flag on the brand-new Landing Ship *Vasily
Trushin*. As the newest ship of the *Ivan Rogov* class he is a very
welcome addition to your force. In addition to the flagship, you have
two Brigades of Landing ships and one of fast landing craft. In total
you have enough capacity to lift the entire 336<sup>th</sup> Guards
Naval Infantry Brigade and have also been tasked with transporting an
Air Defence Brigade. Combined with an Airborne Brigade you should have
no difficulty overwhelming the Danish defences, once you get past their
submarines.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\bf\bf2\media\image2.jpeg" style="width:5.76042in;height:3.74774in" alt="A group of people standing on a submarine in the water Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

**<u>Baltic Fury \#2</u>** is an interesting scenario in that your
perspective is from the Soviet side and your amphibious forces are very
different from the classic US Marine Corps force that has been portrayed
in many scenarios. The size and scale would makes this a very manageable
scenario while still posing some difficult challenges.

Bornholm is an idyllic island with beautiful beaches in the south and
rocky cliffs in the north. Although small, its placement directly in the
center of a very narrow sea makes it critical steppingstone for the
Soviet plan.

The main air battle with NATO is not portrayed but will be very relevant
to play. Ground combat should be minimal as most targets on Bornholm
should be located and neutralized by the player before Soviet boots hit
the ground. If they are not, there could be trouble.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\bf\bf2\media\image3.jpeg" style="width:5.72917in;height:4.0625in" alt="A group of ships in the ocean Description automatically generated with low confidence" />
