**Northern Fury â€“ Plug the Gap**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ 28 Apr 2015</u>**

Well, finished this one off, and managed to succeed. I fended off the
hovercraft with Jaguars and Sea-Skua toting helicopters (which then
landed on the islands). I was able to land my paratroopers and liason
units without interference later on. Far forward patrols in the NE kept
the bombers away. A strong effort to pick off the Russian AEW and long
range surveillance units, at the cost some good aircraft, but I think it
was worth it to blind them, and their lack of awareness was definitely
helpful when it came time to tackle the surface groups.

Once the Baku group was blind, TG De Ruyter was able to stay undetected
at long missile range and knock off some of the escorting frigates,
while Buccaneers with short range Martels got another one. Moving around
the open flank, TG de Ruyter tried a concentrated shot at the Baku with
its remaining Harpoons. Three made it through, but that was not enough
to sink the tough Baku, which limped along at 50% damage. I could have
come in on this with Jaguars and iron bombs, but I think it would have
been a total slaughter, so they stayed home. (A test after the game
proved this: for the loss of 10 Jaguars I got a destroyer, mildly
wounded a Kresta, battered the Baku some more, and briefly set it on
fire, but it did not sink. Those SA-9s are nasty...)

My sub was out of position to intercept the Kuznetsov, but did manage to
bite off an escorting Sovremenny with Harpoons. Later on, a concentrated
off axis BOL attack with every Sea Eagle the British own managed to sink
the Kuznetsov, which didn't spot the attack in time for its escorts to
weigh in significantly. Most of the Buccaneers and all the Harriers got
away, but the ones toting Martel ARMs had to get too close, and didn't
escape. (Incidentally, those Martels pack a wallop! They managed to
cause significant damage to both the Slava and Kirov, and if I'd
concentrated on one they'd have probably sunk it. No piddly HARM
warheads there!)
