**<u>Baltic Fury \#1 – Storm the Gates.</u>**

**<u>AAR by maverick3320, Oct 2021</u>**

13 Feb 1994  
  
Per the scenario designer's notes:  
  
You are the commander NATO’s BALTAP (Baltic Approaches) Command. BALTAP
is a joint force of land, sea and air forces arrayed specifically to
keep hostile WP forces bottled up in the Baltic Sea. Your forces are
primarily Danish and German but some NATO reinforcements can be
expected. The restricted waters in the western Baltic funnel hostile
forces directly to the island of Zeeland and Copenhagen itself. One
thing is certain, there will be a lot of combat power deployed into a
very small space.  
  
Precautions over the past few hours have put a flight of F-16s forward
on Bornholm Island, a few ships to sea and a NATO AWACs forward in the
area of Kiel Germany. Other forces are preparing but so far there have
been no hostilities.  
  
Things don't look good.  
  
The bad news: my intel tells me that the Soviets have a bunch of empty
ports and the airfields covered with IR-defeating smoke. There are at
least a dozen subs out there, well over 200 front-line fighters, along
with a good amount of enemy strike and support aircraft. Judging by the
number of Soviet airfields in range of the AO I could be in for a world
of hurt. A Soviet SAG with a Kynda CG, 2x Sovremmeny DDGs, and an FFG
Neustrashimyy are also headed my way. Further, it looks like Poland may
be leaning toward joining the USSR and Sweden is blocking off it's
airspace to NATO (but not to the USSR, for the most part). The airspace
I can operate in is quite restricted which will likely make any strike
attempts difficult as I'll have to funnel them through the anticipated
Soviet CAP. Last but not least, there is a large mass of apparently
civilian shipping north of Poland...right in the area where I will
likely need to be firing any anti-ship missiles. I'm sure the Soviets
will have no qualms hiding amongst the civilians as in other Fury
scenarios. Curiously, though, there are no civilian ships around the
NATO ports. Looks like all the European civilian captains have better
intel than SACEUR...  
  
The good news: well, there isn't a whole lot. I've got an AWACs up.
There are 4x F-16s with AIM-9Ls forward positioned on Bornholm...which
are looking more like a liability at this point. Germany has 50+
Tornados IDS available (although it will take 6 hours for the loadouts),
and Denmark has a similar number of F16As, although with a shortage of
AIM-9s. Germany also has some Mig-29s, potentially my best air-to-air
/assets, along with some F4 ICEs that have an extremely limited number of
AMRAAMs (24 I believe). I'm also "promised" 12x Tornado ADVs from
England at some point. Scattered throughout the AO are 3x Patriot
batteries along with a number of HAWKs as well. I have a good number of
Atlantic ASW aircraft but until I have some sort of idea of what the air
picture will look like I'm going to be quite conservative with them. I
have a few subs at sea, but until I have an idea of what the Soviet
naval picture looks like I'm going to keep them quiet. There are dozens
of Harpoon- and Exocet-armed patrol boats in port, but readiness
timelines are all over the place so I'll have to develop a strategy for
them once I have a better operational picture. I have a few German DDGs
and DDs, but I'm wary of sending them off into a heavy sub threat
without having control of the air as well.  
  
One last note: BVR engagment logic is locked at "crank if possible". I
edited this immediately, as I can't think of a reason why the theater
commander (or whoever is my boss in this scenario) would dictate tactics
to me. From experience, the Tornado/Sky Flash combo is basically useless
if the Tornados try to crank after firing.  
  
My plan: To absorb the anticipated blow as best as possible. I set up
three CAPs in the center of the map, just north of Rugen. Tornado
loadouts would be a heavy mix of HARMs and Kormorans, with some AIM-9Ls
thrown in for backup air defense. My main air platforms, the F16s, are
manueverable, but they are going to be outclassed by the Soviet air both
at range and in close (AA-11s give me nightmares). So my basic plan is
to try and set SAM traps for as many front-line Soviet fighters as
possible, as I believe the Soviet fighters to be their center of
gravity. Hopefully I can send in my F-16s while the Mig-29s are dodging
Patriot and HAWK missiles. At sea, I'm going to be extremely
conservative with my surface forces until I have a better idea of what
I'm up against.  
  
**AND SO IT BEGINS**  
  
The Soviets put what seems like 100+ aircraft in the air heading toward
Roskilde and Vaerlose - fighters, jammers, bombers, everywhere. I have
no hope of stopping them with my air so I watch as my SAMs do the best
they can. A hasty evac of all the helos as Roskilde leads to disaster as
the Soviet fighters detect them at long range and kill almost all of
them. Roskilde takes a pounding like I've never seen an airfield get hit
before; with one HAWK battery and a few MANPADs there was no hope of
defense. Verlose fares a bit better, but is still almost completely
wiped out. While the eastern Danish airfields are being pounded, ARM
missiles start popping up everywhere headed toward most of the Danish
land-based radar sites. Further ARM attacks go after the Patriots and
HAWKs; thankfully, I'm able to protect my Patriots for the most part.
Bornholm is also bombed into oblivion by waves of Fitters. Both Roskilde
and Vaerlose would burn throughout the scenario.  
  
After the first wave, there were two additional large attack waves. My
interceptor/fighter force slowly started taking losses, even with
cautious use and judicious micromanagement. Micromanaging can only go so
far when your fighters are outnumbered 5 to 1! However, attrition
started to set in for the Soviets. I focused everything I could on the
Flankers as they seemed the largest threat, and eventually by the end of
the scenario I rarely saw them. In between, though, their long-range
missiles made things very interesting.  
  
Poland, as expected, declared for the Soviets mid-scenario; thankfully
they didn't add a lot to the fight other than a few patrol boats that
were easily swept aside, and a SA-10 site that was less easily
dispatched, but eventually buried under a blizzard of Tornado-flung
HARMs. Having no jammer or ELINT aircraft made strikes somewhat risky
business.  
  
Throughout the scenario, bases, including BALTAP HQ and several naval
bases, started taking hits from high explosives (presumably
Spetznaz/commandos). F35 Draken recon, equipped with IR, was the only
way to find them, and usually it was after they had struck. In several
cases they were able to hit passing ships from 10km away (?).
Eventually, though, they were all taken care of.  
  
By mid-scenario I was able to inflict enough losses on the Soviet
front-line fighters to allow my strike aircraft some breathing room. The
Tornado/Kormoran combination went to work on the plethora of Grishas,
Pauks, Nanachukas, Krivaks, and Tarantuls. The Soviet SAG was eventually
destroyed as well, after taking down several NATO strike aircraft. NATO
surface forces didn't fare well, either. Multiple patrol boats were hit
by Su-24 strikes, and 5-6 of them were torpedoed when a group of seven
Type 143s stumbled upon a diesel sub that I never did find. Multiple
other boats were threatened by numerous SSC-1 Sepal strikes (range of
250km!); thankfully, the slow speed of the missiles allowed my CAPs to
down most of them, followed by the RIM-116s, which did an excellent job
throughout the scenario in close air defense. If only they could reach
36,000 feet...  
  
The fourth and last wave was composed almost entirely of Mig-29s and
attacked what was left of Roskilde. Rather than tangle with 40 Mig-29s,
I let them attack and then pounced on the trailing formations, downing
eight with F16As and Tornados. A NATO fighter push further east led to a
massive group of Mig-23 Flogger Ks heading out to intercept, so NATO
beat a hasty retreat and called it a day.  
  
Overall, a massive and extremely fun scenario. Challenging on every
front; I scored well, but many of the Soviet air losses were due to poor
AI; in the hands of a reasonably competent player the USSR would have
rolled NATO hard (which is what I suspect may happen in the book). As
always, cheers to Gunner98 for the scenario design.  
  
**Final score: 525 (Triumph**, but certainly didn't feel that way)
