**Northern Fury 14, Here Comes he Cavalry**

**AAR By Joel Radunzel**

Post 1

We're a week into World War II in 1994. Iceland, as well as North and
Central Norway have fallen. In the last scenario, the *Enterprise* CVBG
withdrew under pressure and was replaced by the fresh *Carl Vinson*
group. Also, the *Eisenhower* CVBG fought its way north from the Med
through a screen of Soviet submarines. Both battle groups are now
approximately four hundred miles south of Iceland, ready to start
offensive operations to retake the island from the Soviets.

The Soviets have not been idle. They have managed to concentrate a large
amount of combat power on Iceland, including two air Divisions of
fighters, including many modern ones (Su-27s, MiG-29s, and MiG-23s), an
air Division of bombers (Su-24s), an air division of support aircraft,
and a division of SAM batteries, mostly concentrated on Iceland's
southwest peninsula around Keflavik and Reykjavik. This will be a tough
nut to crack, but the carriers only have part of it.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf14\nf14_JR\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.41806in" alt="A picture containing map Description automatically generated" />

The strategy to take down the Soviets on Iceland will consist of a
series of one-two punches, with the US Navy punching during the day, and
the USAF punching at night. This scenario encompasses the first phase of
this operation.

Starting at 0600 tomorrow, both Carrier Air Wings will conduct a massive
sweep north to engage the Soviet air forces on Iceland. The sweep will
consist of two full squadrons of Phoenix missile-carrying F-14s and two
squadrons of AMRAAM-carrying F/A-18s. These will engage the enemy and
then withdraw to rearm. The plan is to conduct this sweep three times
during the day tomorrow in order to annihilate the Soviet aerial
defenses on the island. Then at 1800 the USN will clear the air over
Iceland to make way for a massive USAF strike coming in from the UK and
Greenland during the night.

Of course, while all this is going on, the carriers and their air wings
will need to defend themselves from Soviet subs and remain hidden from
the Soviet bombers. To this end, ASW aircraft are up, and the air wings
have aloft a picket line of EA-6B Prowlers to screen the formations with
electronic noise as well as E-2C Hawkeyes for early warning. Ahead of
the advancing carriers, a line of US Los Angeles-class attack boats are
moving towards Iceland to clear the way for the carriers, gather intel
on the Soviet defenses, and rescue downed aviators from the icy waters
of the February North Atlantic.

Will the might of two full CVBGs be enough to defeat the Soviet air
forces on Iceland in just twelve hours? Read on to find out!

Second Post

The two pairs of F-14 Tomcats of the Combat Air Patrols for the two
American carriers, *Carl Vinson* and *Dwight D. Eisenhower*, thundered
down their steam catapults and into the sub-arctic dusk. The two
carriers, each surrounded by powerful rings of escorts, were about four
hundred miles from each other, and each was about four hundred miles
from the south coast of their objective, the southwest peninsula of
Iceland. While the two pairs of pilots ascended in their big fighters
and flew north to screen their floating homes, the two American battle
groups continued to steam in the same direction, angling slightly
towards each other to provide increasing mutual support. The savaging of
the *Enterprise* battle group earlier had taught the Americans the
importance of mass against the powerful Soviet forces on Iceland.
Tomorrow, however, the Soviets would be getting a taste of their own
medicine, when the mass of the combined air groups if the US carriers
swept north.

In the carrier’s air group ready rooms, squadron officers were
finalizing the plans and rosters for the coming sweep. Pilots were being
sent to eat hearty dinners from the galley. Once fed, the pilots would
turn in early (though few of them would sleep easily) to get some shut
eye before their zero-three-hundred wakeup call. Around the ship
formations, helicopters from the escorts buzzed to and fro, lowering
their dipping sonars and dropping sonobuoys to screen their vessels from
the ever-present threat of Soviet submarines. To the north, a picket
line of EA-6B Prowlers, E-2C Hawkeyes, and ES-3B Shadows both watched
for Soviet aerial threats and sent electronic noise forth to confuse any
enemy sensors that tried to reach south.

The American battle groups needed to push north through the night to
close the range with the Soviet bases on Iceland. This would allow the
Navy fighters scheduled to engage the Russians tomorrow to remain on
station longer and fly more sorties, since less time would be spent
transiting to and from the carriers. But steaming closer to the Soviet
bases increased the threat to the American ships as well, both from
submarine and from air attacks.

The Soviets on Iceland knew the Americans were coming. It had been the
intervention of *Vinson*’s air group that had saved the *Enterprise*
from destruction earlier, and the *Ike* group had plowed through a
screen of Soviet submarines in its transit north. But without precise
knowledge of the American carriers’ whereabouts, there could be no
effective attacks from Soviet missile-armed bombers or missile
submarines, which were proving to be the most dangerous weapons in the
Soviets’ arsenal. But the previous week of combat had taken a heavy toll
on the Russians’ dedicated long-range-maritime reconnaissance aircraft,
so much so that few were now available to search for the American ships.

Instead, the VVS (Soviet Air Forces) commander on Iceland decided on an
unorthodox tactic to find the American flattops. At the same time as the
American Tomcats were thundering off their decks, flights of Su-27
interceptors, the most capable fighters in the Soviet inventory, roared
down the runway at Reykjavik airport, ascended to cruising altitude, and
turned southeast to set course over the North Atlantic.

The Soviet commander determined that he did not possess the ability to
find both American carriers, so he had ordered his fighters to sweep
towards the probable location of the eastern one, as this one would be
closer to the Soviet Tu-22M3 Backfire bombers now operating from Norway,
and would thus be easier to strike once found. The four Flankers flew
south through the darkening sky.

---

Two hundred miles to the west of Iceland, the chief petty officer
overseeing the sonar room aboard the *Los Angeles*-class submarine USS
*Newport News* called, “Con, Sonar, I have a faint submerged contact
ahead—designate Goblin Three—bearing zero-nine-zero, range approximately
one five miles. Seems to be moving from north to south.”

The American submarine’s captain, Commander Anheiser, responded quickly
but calmly, “Helm, slow to five knots. Come to new heading
zero-seven-five. Let’s figure out who we’re dealing with, then slip in
behind him.” Hunting Soviet subs wasn’t *Newport News*’ assigned mission
right now, but if one had just happened to stumble across the American
hunter submarine’s path...

*Newport News*’ course angled slightly north of their previous easterly
course, and the American submarine slipped slowly and silently through
the dark, icy waters to the contact fifteen miles ahead.

---

North of USS *Dwight D. Eisenhower*, the two pilots of the carrier’s
CAP, who had now been circling in their racetrack pattern for nearly an
hour, heard one of the Hawkeye controllers call over their radios “Red
Lightning Three-Five, this is Seahawk Three. Two bogeys bearing
three-one-zero. Come right to three-four-five to intercept. Keep your
radars off, over.” The flight lead clicked his transmit button twice in
acknowledgement, then banked north and pushed his throttles forward to
full military power.

Heart rates for both pilots began to climb as they flew north. The
Americans knew that anything approaching from the north certainly
sported red stars on its tail. Both aviators had been disappointed to
see their names on the CAP mission line of their air group assignment
board instead of the next day’s sweep, but that disappointment was
forgotten now as they flew towards the first engagement of the night. As
they flew, the pilots heard the AWACS controllers order the pair of
ready F-14s standing by on Ike’s forward catapults into the sky as
backup.

Third Post

The Soviet pilots flying south in their Su-27s were operating at a
distinct disadvantage to the Americans coming to meet them. First, they
were operating beyond the range of support from any of their electronic
/assets, which included A-50 Mainstay AWACS and as well as electronic
warfare /assets operating over northern Iceland. They were thus blind to
what was ahead of them until and American plane either switched on its
radar or flew within the detection range of the Russian fighters’ own
radars. The Soviet aviators, knowing that they were operating within the
detection range of the blasted American Hawkeyes, were not making any
pretense of stealth, but were instead flying with their radars on and
radiating. Instead of stealth, the Soviets would rely upon the
impressive maneuverability of their aircraft to fight through American
opposition and get close enough to detect the US fleet.

The American Tomcats had taken off with a mixed air-to-air loadout of
AIM-54 Phoenixes, AIM-7 Sparrows, and AIM-9 Sidewinders. The Sidewinders
would be of limited use, since dog-fighting at night over the water
would not be the favored choice of either side. The Phoenixes, on the
other hand, outranged anything the Soviets brought to the fight, and
were active radar homing to boot, which meant that they could guide
themselves to their target in the terminal phase of their attack
profile. Their disadvantage lay in the fact that the big AIM-54s were
not the most maneuverable weapons with which to engage the nimble
Flankers. The semi-active homing Sparrows, on the other hand, needed to
be guided to their target by the firing aircraft’s radar, though these
missiles too outranged the R-73 missiles carried by the Sukhois.

As the pilots of the two American jets closed to within Phoenix range of
the Soviets, directed by the controllers on Seahawk 3, each Tomcat pilot
switched on his powerful AN/AWG-9 radar, acquired the oncoming bogeys,
locked an AIM-54 onto the contact, and fired a missile, both pilots
announcing, “Fox Three!”

The two huge Phoenixes ignited their engines and accelerated to Mach 5
as they arced upwards to the upper edge of the stratosphere. Reaching
their apogee, the big air-to-air missiles then tipped back downwards and
dove towards the Soviet jets, whose pilots still did not know for sure
that they were under attack. Only when the AIM-54s were in their
terminal dive and emitting their own targeting radars the Russian pilots
begin to react.

Still, the Su-27 was an incredibly maneuverable jet, and the Sukhois
were piloted by the best airmen the Soviets could train. They responded
quickly, throwing their twin-engine, twin-tailed jets into violent
evasive maneuvers. It was already too late of one of the Soviet pilots,
however. The first AIM-54 exploded just as he was throwing his stick
over. The expanding cone of shrapnel riddled the Soviet fighter from
above, killing the pilot before it also destroyed both engines. The
Su-27 fell from the night sky.

The second Soviet pilot was quicker on the uptake and managed to both
deploy chaff to confuse the missile and get his aircraft on a course
perpendicular to the threat. The Phoenix, unable to compensate for the
maneuver, exploded its warhead into the empty air just behind the
Russian fighter’s tail. Feeling the air buffet his aircraft, the Soviet
flier turned his nose back towards his attackers and searched his radar
screen for something, anything, that he could shoot back at. His only
reward was to see that another of those blasted missiles was already
inbound. He threw his jet into yet another violent turn and evaded this
one as well, all the while trying to work his fighter closer to the
Americans so that he could bring his own missiles to bear.

The surviving Soviet pilot evaded a third AIM-54, the last carried by
the American fighters, and now he was within missile range, as the USN
pilots had been continuing to close the distance as well. The Russian
brought his radar to bear against the nearer of the two American jets
and loosed an R-27 missile. Just as he pressed the trigger though, his
RWR began chirping, telling him that his fighter had been locked onto by
a fire control radar. His dilemma now was to evade the missile he knew
was bearing down on him from somewhere ahead in the dark sky, and thus
abandon the missile he had just launched, or to keep his nose pointed at
the American fighter to guide his own missile in and take his chances.
He chose the latter option.

Keeping his nose pointed at the American, the Soviet pilot scanned the
darkness ahead for any sign of the incoming missile. There! A flicker of
light high and to the left. The Russian punched his chaff dispenser and
gritted his teeth. His own missile was approaching and… BOOM! The
Sparrow missile exploded in the chaff behind the Flanker, buffeting the
Soviet fighter but leaving it undamaged. The Russian let out a breath
and refocused on his own weapon, which was almost to the enemy F-14,
whose pilot was not performing his own defensive maneuver...

In his concentration, the Soviet pilot failed to notice that his RWR was
still chirping. The second Sparrow missile, fired by the other member of
the CAP, exploded into the Su-27s starboard side. The jet’s aviation
fuel ignited, and the entire aircraft disintegrated in a yellow fireball
that lit up the inky arctic night.

Fourth Post

*Ike*’s CAP, the two F-14s of flight Red Lightning Three-Five, didn’t
have long to celebrate their victory. They had expended the bulk of
their long-range armament in downing the two Flankers, including all of
their Phoenixes, and behind the first two Soviets was coming another
flight of Flankers. These had been on a different part of the Russians’
search pattern and had responded to calls to help from their
compatriots, as were another flight of two from further away. With only
two Sparrows left between them, the American pilots followed the
instructions of the controllers on Seahawk Three and turned south. The
Soviets came on riding their afterburners.

These two Russians were eager to avenge their squadron mates, and they
bored in on the withdrawing Americans. Too hard. Before they knew what
was going on, the Soviet pilots were dodging Phoenixes from the reserve
flight of Tomcats from *Ike*. Four AIM-54s were sufficient this time to
down the two Soviet interceptors, and then the four Americans turned
north on the remaining two Flankers, who were arriving late to the
fight. AIM-7s and R-27s crossed paths as the two sides played a high
stakes game of chicken with their radars and semi-active homing
missiles.

The result of this engagement was another Flanker going down in Flames,
and his wingman fleeing for Reykjavik, though none of the Americans had
enough weapons remaining to pursue. Overall, the Americans could be very
satisfied with their performance. Taking advantage of the aerial radars,
control, and jammers, they had downed five of the Soviets’ best fighters
in just a few minutes with no losses. But the Russians kept coming, with
more flights of Su-27s now showing up at the northwest margins of
Seahawk Three’s radar display. To counter the relentless Soviets,
*Eisenhower*’s CAG would have to start launching jets that were
earmarked for the following day’s sweep. Reluctantly he ordered a flight
of AMRAAM-armed F/A-18Cs into the air.

Despite the losses they were inflicting on the Russians, the American
Battle Group was in danger. If even one of the Soviet Flankers
penetrated the American screen far enough to detect the American ships,
then the pilot could radio a report and two regiments of Soviet
missile-armed bombers would be on their way to deliver a heavy blow. So
the Soviets continued to come on, and the *Ike*’s CAG continued to feed
aircraft into the fight to keep his flattop safe.

---

USS *Newport News* had been working around to the north of their contact
over the past hour. The American submarine was now in the baffles of
what they had identified as a *Victor III*-class boat. Captain Anheiser
was trying to work his own boat close enough to put a pair of Mk48s up
the Soviets’ ass when the sonar room reported a course change on the
contact.

“Con, Sonar,” called the Chief, “contact is turning to starboard…he’s
coming about…he’ll have us soon if his turn continues!”

Damn! thought Anheiser. He wasn’t nearly as close as he had intended to
be, but now he had no choice.

“Weps!” he ordered, “snapshot on the contact, tubes one and four…fire!”

Two MK48s ejected from *Newport News*’ tubes and accelerated to
sixty-five knots on a course for the Soviet *Victor* six miles distant.

The crew of the Russian submarine had not known they were being tailed,
but the high-pitched whine of the two American torpedoes disabused them
quickly of their sense of security. But the Soviet captain had ace up
his sleeve. He didn’t know exactly where the American submarine—it had
to be a submarine—was at this moment, but the incoming torpedoes gave a
decent idea. The Soviet captain ordered his boat to continue its turn
until it was headed directly towards the enemy weapons while at the same
time ascending to shallow depth. Then, when his boat was just below the
surface of the choppy waters, the captain ordered, “Fire the Vyuga!”

Aboard *Newport News*, the sonar chief shouted, “Transient! The contact
just launched a weapon! He…turning away now and accelerating…that launch
sounded like a missile, not a torp. No screws.”

That was odd, thought Anheiser. The…SS-N-15! Russian submarines carried
the RPK-2 Vyuga missile, which was essentially a torpedo strapped to a
rocket that could be used to conduct stand-off attacks against other
submarines…

As if on cue, the sonar room called, “Con, Sonar! High speed screw to
stern! Sounds like a torpedo, sir! Range one mile! It’s circling.”

“All ahead flank! Hard right rudder.” ordered the captain. Then, “Take
us down as deep as you can, helm!” The defensive maneuver forced the
Americans to cut the wires on their two MK48s, which continued south
autonomously.

*Newport News* almost escaped the search pattern of the Soviet torpedo,
but not quite. The weapon detected the diving American submarine at the
edge of its active sonar search range and altered course to pursue.
Captain Anheiser knew he was in trouble when the sonar room reported
“constant bearing, decreasing range.”

As the Soviet weapon closed on *Newport News*’ stern, the American
skipper ordered noisemakers launched, then a radical course change to
create a knuckle in the water for the torpedo’s sonar to home in on. One
or the other of these evasive maneuvers worked, because the Soviet
torpedo plowed into the bubbles and the knuckle and emerged through the
other side to find…nothing. The weapon had missed, and *Newport News*
was coming around to put yet more space between herself and the threat.

The Soviet crew was not so fortunate. Though without direction from the
*Newport News* via their wires, both torpedoes managed to acquire the
Russian submarine and bored in. The Soviet captain maneuvered his boat
wildly and launched noisemakers, but to no effect. In quick succession,
the big American weapons struck the hull of the Soviet boat and
exploded, ripping the submarine open like a tin can both fore and aft.
There were no survivors.

After taking several minutes to ensure that the Soviet boat was truly
dead, Captain Anheiser ordered his boat back onto its eastward heading,
towards the west coast of Iceland.

Fifth Post

The sparring between the *Eisenhower* CVBG's CAP and the Soviet Su-27
pilots trying to find the American carrier continued through the night,
with disastrous consequences for the Russians. The American CAG kept a
steady stream of fighters airborne to counter the repeated Soviet
thrusts, which were delivered blindly and with increasing desperation.
Before the night was out, nearly an entire regiment of Su-27s, forty
aircraft, had been shot out of the sky by long-range American missiles,
with no loss to the American air group other than the ordnance necessary
to complete this feat. More importantly, the *Eisenhower* and her
escorts remained masked from Soviet radars and thus safe from Soviet
bombers and missiles.

Soviet submarines stalking the American carriers suffered a similar
disaster. The captain of the most dangerous Soviet boat in the vicinity,
the *Sierra II*-class hunter submarine *Nizhniy Novgorod*, had been
slowing working westward on a hunch that this course would put him
astride the course of the carrier *Carl Vinson*, which had intervened so
improvidently to save the *Enterprise* earlier. The Soviet captain had
been correct in this assumption, but slightly off in his execution of
his plan. Instead of finding himself sitting astride *Vinson*'s course,
he now looked through his periscope at the silhouette of an oncoming
*Perry*-class frigate, part of the carrier's outer screen.

Knowing that he could not increase speed for fear of being detected, the
Soviet captain decided instead to try to fight his way in towards the
carrier. He would sink the frigate, then use the ensuing confusion to
work further west and attack the flattop.

"Weapons officer," the Soviet skipper ordered, "fire two torpedoes at
the American frigate contact from tubes one and three!"

He listened as his orders were carried out. *Nizhniy Novgorod* shuddered
twice as compressed air ejected the two homing torpedoes from their
tubes. Next he ordered, "Dive two forty meters and make your course
two-four-zero degrees, speed five knots."

The sonarmen aboard the American frigate heard the Soviet weapons almost
immediately. In moment they had discerned that the torpedoes were headed
for their ship. The frigate's captain ordered up a course reversal and
flank speed, while the ASW officer called to the airborne ASW
helicopters and S-3s of the screen to come turn the hunter into the
hunted.

The Soviet captain's gambit had been a mistake. The Americans had not
known he was there, and if he had simply continued westwards rather than
engaging the *Perry*, he might have achieved a shot against the
*Vinson*. As it was, the courses of his torpedoes acted as an arrow
pointing straight to the location of his boat, nullifying his
submarine's stealth. In minutes, the swarming American ASW helos had
localized him. A few minutes more, and Mk46 lightweight torpedoes were
splashing into the water to neutralize the threat.

The Soviet captain did not live long enough to know whether or not his
own weapons had achieved success against the American frigate. Had he
lived, he would have been disappointed with the result. Deprived of the
guidance from *Nizhny Novgorod*, the two Soviet torpedoes failed to
locate the evading American warship. They continued on into the vastness
of the North Atlantic, eventually running out of fuel and sinking to the
ocean floor.

Two more Soviet submarines, a *Victor III* and a *Victor I*, achieved
even less success. They were located by the American screens of the two
carriers without ever detecting one of the escorts, and sunk in quick
succession by aerial torpedoes. The seas south of Iceland were becoming
increasingly safe for the carriers to begin their dawn offensive.

Sixth Post

Two hours before dawn, both American carriers began launching their
fighter sweeps. First off the deck were the support aircraft. S-3
Vikings configured as tankers went up first, followed by more EA-6Bs,
and another E-2C. Next, each carrier launched a single F-14 equipped
with a TARPS recon pod. The pilots of these special mission birds stayed
low and headed for the rugged south coast of Iceland. Next up were half
a dozen F/A-18s and F-14s carrying TALD decoys. Their mission would be
to coax the Soviet SAM operators around Keflavik and Reykjavik to turn
on their radars and reveal their locations. Once these aircraft were off
the deck, flight after flight of Phoenix, AMRAAM, and Sparrow-armed
Tomcats and Hornets began to thunder down the steam catapults and into
the brightening sky.

Three hundred miles to the north, the Russians were launching as well.
The Soviet commander, after his interceptors’ disastrous failure to find
the American carriers, had correctly surmised what would come next, and
he intended to be ready. Modern MiG-29 fighters and MiG-31 interceptors
began to launch from the two main airfields, followed by older MiG-23s.
The Soviet pilots flew north and circled over Iceland’s northwestern
Westfjords as the sun rose in the southwestern sky.

The two TARP-equipped F-14s streaked north at little more than wavetop
level. Several dozen miles behind, at ten thousand feet, came the
TALD-carrying jets. Behind them, being careful to stay beyond the
margins of Soviet radar detection range, circled the squadrons who would
engage the Soviet air forces. Even farther south, the new *Arleigh
Burke*-class destroyer USS *Mitscher*, one of *Carl Vinson*’s escorts,
began to launch twenty Tomahawk cruise missiles from its VLS cells. The
weapons rose atop their pillars of flame and smoke, then nosed over to
the north.

The first aircraft that the Russian radars detected were the TALD birds.
The pilots of these fighters flew north in what looked like a strike
formation, with the TARP birds to the front and low. The Soviet fighters
north of the Icelandic southwest peninsula turned south at the direction
of their controllers and went to afterburner to intercept the supposed
inbound strike. The Soviets led with their MiG-29s and -23s, with the
Foxhounds following in support. More Soviet jets began to launch from
their airfields as fast as their pilots could taxi onto the runway.

The two formations approached each other over the waters south of
Iceland. At sixty miles from the coast, the American jets released their
TALDs, which to the Russian radar operators looked for all the world on
their screens like standoff cruise missiles. Now the Soviet pilots had
to choose: pursue the American jets, which were even now turning back
south, or engage the standoff weapons that they had launched. In the
end, the Russians opted in favor of defending their airbases, and
vectored towards the TALDs. The Soviet pilots began to light off their
fighters’ radars to target the incoming missiles.

This was all the encouragement the American fighter jocks, circling to
the south, needed to wing into their own attack. As the Soviet fliers
dove at the TALDs, they heard their radar warning receivers begin to
chirp that American radars were tracking them. Once the RIOs of the
American F-14s began to detect their opponents, they locked their
powerful radars onto the Soviet jets.

The Russians were now between a rock and hard place. They had just begun
to launch against the TALDs, and could not reorient against the American
aircraft without abandoning their semi-active radar homing missiles. To
make matters worse, they had just detected the twenty Tomahawks flashing
underneath at wavetop level. Forty plus American missiles heading for
the southwest peninsula was not a threat they could ignore. So they
continued with their original attacks.

At that moment, the Americans engaged in their first real attack of the
day. From half a dozen Tomcats flying in line abreast, the pilots
rippled off two dozen AIM-54C Phoenixes, then followed the big missiles
in to get within AIM-7 Sparrow range.

Seventh Post

Over the noses of their fighters, the American pilots could watch their
Phoenix missiles as firefly like dots dropping seemingly straight down
into the Soviet formation against the dark blue background of the early
morning arctic sky. Then the missile warheads began to detonate. Broken
Soviet jets began to fall out of the sly like fiery comets even as the
Russians used their own weapons to knock down the TALDs and Tomahawks.
The AIM-54s took a heavy toll. They had been all been targeted against
the dangerous MiG-31s in the Soviet formation, and they did very well
against those blazingly fast but unmaneuverable interceptors.

TALDs, Tomahawks, Phoenixes, and MiGs crisscrossed the sky ahead of the
oncoming American pilots. As the last AIM-54 detonated, the surviving
Soviet pilots, who had done what they could against the American cruise
missiles, turned south to close the distance with their assailants. They
were just in time for their RWRs to announce that another wave of
missiles, these ones AIM-7 Sparrows, were inbound from the advancing
line of Tomcats. This second attacks swept in among the gaggle of
oncoming Russian aircraft. The American RIOs had targeted these weapons
against the maneuverable but short-ranged MiG-29 Fulcrums. Several of
these were smashed down into the water below over the next few seconds,
but still the Russians came on, knowing that they had to close the
distance if they wanted any chance to strike back. Powerful jamming from
EA-6s to the south was hindering the Russians’ attempts to lock their
own radars and missiles onto the American aircraft.

The Soviets had now lost nearly two-dozen aircraft to the Americans. The
remaining pilots were enraged by their impotence and rode their
afterburners in pursuit of the withdrawing Tomcats. The two surviving
Foxhouds began to volley off their AA-6 Acrid long-range missiles in a
desperate attempt to gain some measure of revenge. But just when it
looked like the Soviets might catch the nearest F-14s, the next wave of
American fighter pilots lit off their radars.

A squadron of F/A-18Cs had been coming on behind the initial sweep of
Tomcats. The pilots of the Hornets now began to volley off their
active-homing AMRAAMs at the approaching Soviet jets. The missiles
flashed past overhead of the withdrawing F-14s, forcing the Soviets to
break of their pursuit and evade. This new attack swept in among the
Soviets, and in just a few moments the few surviving Russian pilots were
fleeing back towards Iceland with the Hornets in pursuit.

In the meantime, the surviving TALDs and Tomahawks had been nearing the
Icelandic coast. The Soviets were forced to energize the radars of their
defending SAM batteries, revealing their location. The strength of these
defenses was sobering to the technicians aboard the ES-3B Shadow ELINT
bird that was monitoring Soviet emissions several dozen miles to the
southeast of the air battle. They logged enough the locations for enough
radars to indicate at least four battalions of potent SA-20 SAMs
defending the southeast peninsula. The US Navy fliers would need to
avoid the respectable bubble that these systems protected over the major
Soviet bases, into which the few surviving Soviet pilots of the air
battle were withdrawing.

The engagement of the past several minutes had been an unmitigated
disaster for the Soviets. They had lost dozens of fighters to the
American sweep without exacting any sort of revenge. That was about to
change, however. The sacrifice of initial engagement had allowed time
for another squadron of MiG-31s as well a half a squadron of Su-27s to
get off the ground, and more MiG-29s and -23s were joining these every
minute. The elite pilots of these Foxhounds and Flankers now headed out
of the relatively safe skies over Keflavik to engage the oncoming
squadron of American Hornets.

Eight Post

The American Hornet jocks had over-pursued the few survivors of the
initial sweep, and the MiG-31 pilots now turned the tables. Racing south
at almost Mach 2, the back-seaters on the Soviet interceptors locked
their powerful radars onto the F/A-18s. Once they had a solid target,
the Soviets launched their own big, long-range AA-6 Acrid missiles.
These air-to-air weapons, the biggest such missiles in the world, were
the Soviet equivalent of the AIM-54 Phoenix, and they far outranged the
AMRAAMs carried by the American Hornets.

The US naval aviators, belatedly realizing their peril, turned back
south, becoming now the pursued rather than the pursuers. A fresh half
squadron of F-14s had been following behind the Hornets. The RIOs of
these fighters now locked their own missiles onto the Russians and began
loosing more AIM-54s northwards. Phoenixes and Acrids passed each other
in the upper troposphere on their long-range, Mach 5 arcs towards their
targets. The Soviet missiles, launched first, also began to arrive at
their targets first, but not by much since the American Hornets were
fleeing away from the threats as fast as their afterburners could take
them. The F/A-18 pilots now twisted and turned their fighters in violent
evasive maneuvers. Even so, several Hornets went down, shattered by
shrapnel from the big missiles’ warheads.

Next the Phoenixes arrived among the Foxhounds, and the results were
devastating. In seconds, only a pair of the big interceptors were still
flying, out of what had been a full squadron. But the Foxhounds had
provided a vital service. Their long-range missiles had provided
sufficient cover for the Flankers, Fulcrums, and Floggers to finally
close with the dangerous American jets. Now a massive furball developed
about seventy miles off the Icelandic coast, with Hornets and Tomcats
twisting and turning with the MiGs and Sukhois. AMRAAMs, Sparrows, and
Sidewinders lept of the launch rails of the American fighters while the
Soviets responding with their R-73s and R-27s. More and more aircraft
joined the fray, with the remaining US Navy squadrons of the sweep
arriving to support their comrades, and more pairs of MiGs joining as
fast as they could take off from the southwestern airfields.

Several more American jets went down in flames, including a pair of
F-14s, but despite this the Americans’ numerical advantage and better
organization proved decisive. Over nearly a half hour of aerial combat,
nearly every Soviet fighter fell victim to an American missile. The few
survivors worked desperately to extract themselves from the unfolding
disaster, but in the end only a very few of the nimble MiG-29s and
blazingly fast MiG-31s managed to make good their escape. The Americans
could pursue these only so far before they were in range of the
formidable Soviet SAM defenses, which had minutes before swatted down
the last Tomahawk cruise missiles with contemptuous ease. Reluctantly,
the Americans turned back from their query.

The CAG of *Carl Vinson*’s air group, who had been controlling the
American side of the fight from an E-2C Hawkeye to the south, saw that
the Soviets were ceding the skies south of Iceland and ordered his
fighters to withdraw. The Americans had expended most of their
long-range Phoenixes, Sparrows, and AMRAAMs, and with them most of their
offensive potential. They had lost nine aircraft, including seven
Hornets and two Tomcats. In return, the naval fliers could claim over a
hundred Soviet jets, the core of the Soviet aerial defense of Iceland.
Included in these losses were entire squadrons of the best fighters the
Soviets could put into the fights, the dangerous MiG-29s, -31s, and
Su-27s.

The American pilots recovered aboard their two flattops after their
battle, and the deck crews aboard both ships immediately began
feverishly rearming and refueling the fighters for the next mission. The
American plan called for two more sweeps before nightfall, when the US
Air Force would take over the air offensive over Iceland’s skies. The
pilots themselves went to their ready rooms for debriefing, after which
they would be provided a meal in the galley before their mission
briefings for the next sweep.

At the Soviet Reykjavik and Keflavik bases, most of the Soviet ground
crews waited in vain for their aircraft and pilots to return. For the
few survivors of the battle, their own squadron ready rooms were
depressingly empty.

In the waters south of Iceland, yet another American advantage began to
tell. The *Los Angeles*-class subs of the American naval screen, who had
been proceeding quietly north throughout the night, had come to
communications depth at the scheduled commencement of the American
sweep. The captains of these vessels now directed their boats towards
the rescue beacon of several of the downed American fliers, trying to
rescue them before they succumbed to exposure in the icy waters of the
North Atlantic. For the dozens of Soviet pilots who had bailed out of
stricken aircraft, there would be no rescue.

Ninth Post

With the US air groups back aboard their carriers and the surviving
Russian pilots back at their bases, the battle off the southern coast of
Iceland settled into a late morning lull. The US electronic surveillance
aircraft and jammers remained aloft, as did the CAPs for the two
carriers. The Russians, with the heart ripped out of their air regiments
based on the southwest peninsula, opted to keep their aircraft on the
ground until another threat materialized.

Aboard *Ike*, the CAGs biggest concern was the carrier’s stocks of
air-to-air munitions. Many had been expended fending off the Su-27s the
night before, and the fighters in the sweep against southwest peninsula
had expended even more. *Eisenhower*’s magazines had enough ordnance for
one more battle of the type the combined air groups had just fought,
after which Ike would be down to the bare minimum stocks necessary to
safeguard the carrier against air attack. *Vinson*’s air group, who had
not taken part in the previous night’s jousting, was in better shape,
with enough ordnance for at least two more maximum efforts.

The carriers were in much better shape in terms of aviation fuel. After
the flattops had launched the first sweep, the oilers Supply and Detroit
had pulled up even and run fuel lines across. Striking Fleet Atlantic
had mandated that these valuable support vessels not operate above the
sixty degree northing, and with both battle groups approaching this line
the carriers’ commanders elected to suck as much avgas out of these
vessels as possible before sending them south. The carriers would
continue north to close the distance their fighters would need to cover
in the next two missions. With the fuel transfer now complete, the
commander of the *Vinson* CVBG detached his Canadian ships to escort the
supply south, while *Ike*’s detached the nuclear powered cruiser USS
*Virginia* long with two *Perry*-class frigates to escort the *Detroit*.
Both battle groups continued to steam north, angling towards each other
to improve their mutual support.

The initiative of the battle in the north Atlantic had now passed
decisively to NATO with the losses they had inflicted on the Soviet air
forces in Iceland earlier in the day. Now the Americans pressed their
advantage. Just before noon, the second sweep of the day began to launch
from both carriers, which had not closed to within three hundred miles
of the island.

The plan for the midday sweep differed from that conducted earlier. The
first mission had concentrated both of the carriers’ air groups in one
massive punch against the Soviet air wings based around Keflavik and
Reykjavik. In this mission, *Vinson*’s pilots would continue to put
pressure on the survivors of southwestern air regiments, while
*Eisenhower*’s fighters would push up towards the Soviet dispersal field
at Hornafjordur, on the south-central coast of Iceland, to try to draw
out whatever Soviets were there.

The Americans opted not to repeat their earlier tactic of launching
decoys and cruise missiles against the Soviet ground defenses. The
magazines only held a limited number of the TALD decoys, and the battle
groups would require these and as many Tomahawks as they could hoard in
order to dismantle the Soviet SAM defenses tomorrow. Instead, a half
squadron of *Ike*’s fighters, composed of both F-14s and F/A-18s,
configured themselves into something resembling a strike formation and
went to low altitude, making for Hornafjordur. Further south, a pair of
EA-6Bs continued to provide EW support to the sweep.

The Soviet fighter regiment at Hornafjordur was composed entirely of
older MiG-23s, some of which were airborne over central Iceland at the
start of this latest attack. As the American formation crossed to within
radar detection range of the Soviet A-50 Mainstays orbiting over
northern Iceland, the Russian controllers vectored these towards the
Americans. The Russian pilots knew they were outclassed, particularly
after the stunning defeat of their first-line fighters a few hours
before, but with their airfield under threat the Soviet pilots had no
choice but to engage.

Soon the controllers aboard the E-2C directing this eastern part of the
battle called to report multiple bogeys approaching from central Iceland
and many more rising from the runway at Hornafjordur. Soon the Soviets
had put a respectable force of Floggers into the air, and these flew out
over the water to meet the American strike. A word from the controllers
aboard the Hawkeye prompted the American pilots to begin ascending to
meet their adversaries.

The Americans fired first. AIM-7 Sparrows lanced out from the American
F-14s in the formation as they passed through twenty thousand feet. At
that moment, the Russians played the one card they had left.
Hornafjordur airport was defended by a battalion of SA-20 SAMS. The
battalion’s commander had kept his radars on standby until American
aircraft entered his missiles’ engagement envelope. That had now
happened. The Soviet radar operators energized their systems and locked
onto the ascending Americans. In seconds, the multiple missiles rose
into the cold arctic sky from the battalion’s launchers.

Now the Americans were in a difficult spot. More than a dozen MiG-23s
were approaching from the north and northeast, while SA-20 missiles were
streaking in from the direction of Hornafjordur. With their RWRs
screaming into their ears, the Tomcat crews now had to decide whether to
play chicken with the SAMs in order to keep their Sparrows on target, or
break off and evade while abandoning the missiles they had launched. The
Americans opted for the latter option.

The Americans dove for the deck, trying to put the curvature of the
earth between themselves and the ground-based radars that were guiding
the SA-20s to them. Robbed of their radar guidance, the American AIM-7s
failed to guide to their targets and became a non-factor. The maneuver
paid off, however. As the American jets dropped down to below a thousand
feet, the radars at Hornafjordur lost them, and the Soviet missiles lost
their lock as well.

Now, however, the US Navy fliers were in something of a fix. They were
down at low altitude, unable to ascend for fear of the SA-20s, with an
ever-increasing number of MiG-23s bearing down on them. The Americans
turned south and fled over the water, screaming for support from the
rest of the fighters of the sweep. The help wasn’t long in coming.
AIM-54s Phoenixes, fired by supporting Tomcats to the south, began to
tear into the Soviet formation as they drew closer to the fleeing
American jets, then American Sparrows began to do the same. Finally,
once the initial group of American jets had cleared the projected radius
of the SA-20s, the F/A-18s turned about. Once their radars had picked up
the approaching Soviets, the Hornet drivers began targeting and
launching their AMRAAMs as quickly as they could shift between contacts.
Once all their missiles were in the air, the Hornet drivers winged over
once again and dove for the deck.

More and more missiles smashed into the Floggers. Broken jets tumbled
from the sky, and still the Russians’ radars could not lock onto the
American aircraft through the electronic haze thrown out by the distant
EA-6Bs. The Soviets’ fleeting advantage created by the SA-20 ambush was
developing into yet another disaster. In minutes, AMRAAMs, Phoenixes,
and Sparrows had nearly annihilated the fighter regiment based at
Hornafjordur, and those American pilots who still had missiles oriented
to the northwest to engage the tattered remains of Soviet airpower that
was now approaching the south central coast from the bases on the
southwestern peninsula.

Tenth Post

The Soviet survivors of the first sweep against the southwest peninsula
had opted not to repeat their mistake of engaging the Americans to the
south. After taking on to meet the new American threat, they had
remained loitering to the north of Reykjavik and Keflavik, waiting for
the American fighters of the *Carl Vinson* air group to come to them. As
the American fliers would not risk their jets against the dense SAM
defenses that the Soviets had set up over this part of Iceland, the
aerial battle to the west never materialized.

Instead, what few Russian jets that did manage to rise from the two main
airfields turned east and flew towards Hornafjordur to assist their
comrades over the central coast. But after having the formations gutted
earlier in the morning, the Soviet showing was pathetic. A few flights
of MiG-29s and -31s came out from the protection of their SAM defenses
to try to engage the rampaging American fighters from Ike, but the
results of these tentative jabs was several more downed Soviet
first-line aircraft. In exchange the Russian pilots only managed to
shoot down a single additional F-14.

What finally forced the American fighter pilots to withdraw from the
central coast was not so much Soviet resistance as the depletion of
their long-range missiles. The naval aviators, dashing in to launch
their weapons and then withdrawing to clear the airspace for their
comrades, were now almost entirely down to short-ranged Sidewinder
missiles, and another well-organized Soviet squadron of MiG-23s was
coming down from their dispersal field at Akureyri on Iceland’s north
coast. While these older jets had so far proven to be no match for the
more modern American fighters, they did carry the R-27 (AA-10 Alamo)
missiles that far outranged the AIM-9s. The Americans would have liked
to bring *Vinson*’s air group, which had encountered no opposition in
the earlier kill zone south of Keflavik, around to the east for support,
but these jets lacked the fuel for this maneuver.

Instead, *Ike*’s CAG, controlling the fight from a seat aboard one of
the E-2Cs from the south, decided that his air group had done as much as
they could in this sweep. They would deal with the fighters out of
Akureyri on the next and final sweep of the day. Obeying orders, the
*Eisenhower*’s squadrons turned their noses south for home, leaving the
skies above central Iceland tenuously in the hands of the Soviet pilots,
who had not lost upwards of one hundred fifty of their number in a day
of brutal aerial combat.

As both carriers recovered their respective aircraft, the tired deck
crews immediately began working to prepare the jets for a third surge at
the end of the day. Onboard *Eisenhower*, the major concern was an acute
shortage of all air-to-air munitions other than AIM-9 Sidewinders.
Because of this, *Vinson*’s group would have to bear the brunt of the
final sweep. In a brief radio conversation, the two CAGs of the
respective air groups discussed a gap that had presented itself in the
Soviet SAM defenses that could allow the American fighters to actually
dominate the skies over Iceland itself. They hatched a combined plan to
exploit this weakness, and then went to their ready rooms to finalize it
with their squadron officers. Meanwhile, the rest of the pilots were
debriefed and then released to rest and eat some chow. They had a mere
two hours before they needed to be in their ready rooms to receive the
briefing for their third mission of the day.

Eleventh Post

The next three hours passed uneventfully in the air, but under water the
ASW screens of the two carriers, which were now nearing each other as
they angled towards the Icelandic coast, detected, localized, and sank a
*Victor I*-class sub whose crew had the bad luck to find themselves in
the patch of ocean where the battle groups were converging. By sixteen
hundred hours, the American deck crews were once again spotting their
fighters onto the carriers’ catapults, and for the third time that day
the American squadrons winged into the sky.

During the previous sweep, the technicians aboard the ES-3B Shadow ELINT
aircraft had noted the locations of the SA-20 batteries on the southwest
peninsula and at Hornafjordur. The locations of these defensive systems
screened the airfields from attack, but their positioning also left a
gap in SAM coverage along the coastline that would allow the Americans
to penetrate the airspace over Iceland between Keflavik and
Hornafjordur. Shooting that gap, the American pilots could make straight
for Akureyri on the island’s north coast, which was the home of the last
intact Soviet squadron in Iceland.

The American squadrons spread out into successive waves as they flew
north. As the formations of F-14s and F/A-18s approached the coast west
of Hornafjordur, a few Soviet pilots rose grimly in their MiG-23s from
the airfield at that coastal town. Half a dozen Sparrow-armed Tomcats
from Eisenhower broke off to deal with this threat. The rest of the
formation continued north, soon going feet dry over the rugged south
coast and continuing on towards Akureyri.

The Americans were now over the rugged interior of Iceland, and this was
a threat that the Soviets, even given their depleted strength, could not
ignore. The fighter regiment at Akureyri had been maintaining a strong
CAP over the north coast, if for no other reason than to protect the
A-50 Mainstay AWACS and An-12 EW aircraft flying there. It was these
support aircraft that were the real target for the Americans’ last
fighter sweep of the day, if they could reach them. If not, they would
have to settle for bagging whatever fighter pilots rose to defend the
bigger birds.

The Americans easily swept aside or drove off the few Floggers coming
from Hornafjordur while the bulk of the combined air wings began to
engage the Soviet fighter regiment burning south from Akureyri. Sparrow
and AMRAAM missiles shot out from the American formation, arcing
northwards towards the desperate Russians, who pushed their machines
frantically to close with the Americans. Their efforts were for naught.
The American weapons tore hole after hole in the Soviet ranks until,
finally, there was nothing left flying over Iceland that bore a red
star. The pilots from the two American carriers had won complete mastery
over the skies of Iceland.

The Soviet fliers had achieved one success by their self-sacrifice,
however. In destroying the MiG-23 regiment from Akureyri, the Americans
had been unable to pursue the Soviet AWACS and EW aircraft north.
Striking Fleet Atlantic had imposed a restriction on the carriers’
fighter sweeps that there were to be no operations north of the
sixty-five degree northing line. This was so as not to interfere with
some vital special operations missions occurring to the north of
Iceland. Now, this restriction saved the crews of the Soviet A-50s and
An-12s, who would otherwise have been easy prey for the unchallenged
American fighters.

Instead, after circling over Iceland’s snowy interior, the triumphant
American squadrons turned south, flying back out over the Atlantic along
the same seem between SA-20 batteries that they had used to get in. No
Soviet aircraft rose to pursue. If any Russian fighters were left, they
had finally decided to practice the better part of valor.

The sky was darkening at eighteen hundred hours as the last American
Tomcat flew south across the sixty-two degree line, leaving behind them
a shattered Soviet air force in Iceland. Nearly two hundred Soviet
fighters had been shot down in twenty-four hours of combat, to a mere
eleven on the American side. On top of that, the American task forces
and submarines had combined to sink six Soviet nuclear submarines. The
two carrier groups, now within easy mutually supporting distance, had
turned back south to link up with replenishment ships, whose crews would
re-stock the flattops magazines for the next day’s missions.

For the Soviets, the night would bring no rest. As the last US Navy
fighters disappeared off the Russian radar screens, to the east the US
Air Force was mustering a massive strike from bases in Canada and
Greenland to smash the Soviet SAM defenses and begin to pave the way for
the Marines to recapture Iceland.
