**United States** ![](/assets/images/nato/us/image1.png)

![](/assets/images/nato/us/image2.gif)

**United States:** The US is one of the founding members of NATO and is
undoubtedly the important military power in the alliance. Although there
was significant discussion over military reductions following the
unification of Germany, the hard line resurgence in the USSR quickly
stymied that discussion. Internationally, the US has been arguing for
maintenance of Cold War commitments while many governments are more
interested in the ‘Peace Dividend’ that was promised in the late ‘80s.
The divergence of a hawkish response to a resurgent USSR versus
isolationist voices complaining about lack of foreign spending has given
rise to some ugly political situations in Washington.

The US military has undergone some reorganization, minor reductions and
adjustments but has largely maintained its Cold War capabilities. The
Reagan era ‘600 Ship Navy’ is still an aspiration and very close to
becoming a reality, although there are 16 Aircraft Carriers on the
roster, only 13 of these are fully capable with air wings and available
escorts. The US Air Force historically suffered significant cuts and
base closures resulting from three rounds of BRAC (Base Realignment and
Closure Commission) reviews, for the most part these do not occur. The
Army has had a confusing and frustrating few years; the planned
downsizing of forces in Europe after the Gulf War did, to a large extent
happen, but at the same time structures in the US were bolstered and
plans remain to reinforce forces in Germany.

Global commitments have generally grown over the past few years. Instead
of focusing primarily on Europe, the results of the Gulf War have left
significant military commitments in the Middle East and Indian Ocean
area, as well as evolving problems in Central America and Africa.
Although large – the US Military is stretched quite thin.
