**Northern Fury 11, Changing of the Guard**

**AAR By Joel Radunzel**

First Post

It's the sixth day of the war and Northern Norway and Iceland have
fallen to the Soviet onslaught. For the past two days the *Enterprise*
battle group has been holding the line south of Iceland, shielding the
SLOCs and ALOCs from Soviet southward thrusts, as well as fending off
attacks by Soviet submarines and naval aviation on the carrier itself.
Very heavy Soviet fighter and fighter bomber forces have been operating
from captured airfields on Iceland, complicating matters further for
NATO. So far, the lonely battle group has parried everything that has
been thrown at it, but now the *Enterprise* and her consorts may be in
serious trouble.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf11\nf11_jr\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.80486in" alt="Diagram Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

Two days of hard fighting left the *Enterprise*'s magazines seriously
low on air-to-air munitions, and the air group is exhausted after
forty-eight hours of surge operations. The deck crews for the aircraft
are exhausted as well, and this is beginning to show in the growing
number of air frames down with maintenance faults. Perhaps even more
troubling, the SAM magazines of the battle group's escorting warships
are also seriously low, especially the magazines of the task group's two
Aegis cruisers. Taken all together, these facts have left the task
force's commander with serious doubts about his command's ability to
withstand another concerted Soviet strike.

But not all is so bleak. The carrier USS *Carl Vinson*, which was in
Norfolk refitting at the outbreak of hostilities, is now at sea with her
battle group and steaming northeast past Newfoundland at high speed to
relieve *Enterprise*, while the *Eisenhower* battle group is steaming
north after leaving the Med. If *Enterprise* can survive one more day,
the crisis will pass.

The trick will be keeping the carrier alive while at the same time not
leaving the central Atlantic uncovered to Soviet attacks. *Enterprise*
cannot depart to join up with the USS *Monongahela* replenishment group
until *Vinson* is within realistic supporting range.

Other NATO /assets include tankers and E-3 AWACS operating out of Goose
Bay in Canada, P-3 maritime patrol aircraft flying from Gander,
Newfoundland, a small Canadian ASW task force centered on the frigate
*Algonquin*, and the USS *Seattle* replenishment task force returning to
North America from Europe, well south of the action.

Will *Enterprise* survive to fight another day? Will the *Vinson* and
her fresh air group arrive in time to tilt the scales in NATO's favor?
Or will the Soviet onslaught succeed in dealing a stunning blow to NATO
naval strength in the North Atlantic? Read on to find out!

Second Post

“Sir,” called the technician aboard the ES-3A Shadow ELINT aircraft
flying lazy circles south of the *Enterprise* battle group, “I’ve got
another one. This one looks like a Badger L, coming southwest from the
direction of Iceland. His radar’s on, sir.”

“Will he pass within detection range of *Big E*?” asked the ELINT
officer next to him in the cramped aircraft, a modified version of the
S-3 Viking sub hunter. They had been airborne for two hours already, and
this was the third Soviet snooper they had detected since launching from
*Enterprise*’s deck.

“If he keeps his current track...it will be close, sir, responded the
technician.”

The office swore under his breath. The battle group’s best chance of
survival at this point was to evade detection. If the Soviets couldn’t
find them, then they couldn’t hit them. Unfortunately, the Russians
seemed to have a nearly inexhaustible supply of patrol aircraft to cast
over the icy waters of the North Atlantic, their radars reaching our
like floodlights into the chill morning.

“Ok,” the officer said after a moment, “I’ll call the CAG.”

After a short conversation with the air group commander, who was back
aboard *Big E*, the officer turned to the tech again and asked, “What’s
the status on those Mig-31s we’ve been picking up?”

“Still faint, sir,” responded the tech, “coming in and out. They’re
probably circling. Can't give you a range."

The ELINT sensors aboard the Shadow had been picking up the signatures
of several of the dangerous Soviet Mig-31 interceptors patrolling due
south of Iceland, their powerful radars switched on to compensate for
their lack of control from a friendly AWACS. It was helpful that the
Americans could pick up that they were there, but frustrating as well,
as the air group aboard the carrier wouldn’t be able to mount an
effective challenge to the Foxhounds, armed with their long AA-6
missiles, for several hours yet.

“Ok,” the officer said again, “The CAG says we can’t risk the carrier
being seen. He’s launching the ready birds and sending the airborne CAP
to pick off the snooper to our northwest. We’ll see what those Migs do.

Just then the tech said, “Sir, you’re not going to like this...I’m just
picking up another Badger to our northeast...and there may be a patrol
version Su-24 with him as well.”

Damn, though the officer. He called the CAG again to report the bad
news, then said to his tech, “The CAG says the CAP is just going to need
to leave the task force uncovered for a while. He’s sending the ready
fighters east to deal with this new one."

The pilots of the two F/A-18s that had been Enterprise’s CAP were even
now turning northwest and pushing their throttles to military power,
plotting an intercept course for the first snooper. The pilots of the
two F-14s who had just launched and were climbing to altitude kept the
noses of their jets pointed east, plotting a similar course for the
other pair of Soviet recon birds more than two-hundred miles away.

Both pairs of American pilots kept their radars powered down, accepting
direction instead from the crew aboard the ES-3A, who were tracking the
fighter jocks’ targets by the Russians own emissions. Unfortunately, the
Shadow’s sensors could only give a bearing and an approximation of range
from their own location, not a precise fix on the Tu-16L’s location. As
a consequence, the pilots of the two Hornets were forced to energize
their radars twenty minutes later when they arrived in the area where
their prey should have been.

Banking their fighters in a broad, searching turn, the Hornet pilots
searched the sky for the spy plane that was trying to pinpoint their
floating home. After about a quarter turn of the compass, the flight
lead called, “This is Thunderbolt Three, I’ve got him at my eleven
o’clock, range twenty five miles. Engaging.” To his wingman he radioed,
“follow me.”

“Thunderbolt flight, this is Shadow,” called the ELINT crew, “be advised
it looks like those Mig-31s have turned your way. Hurry, over.”

The pilot nodded. This shouldn’t take long. The converted Russian bomber
was approaching him obliquely. He pushed his throttles forward to the
stops to close the range, and at about seventeen miles locked one of his
AIM-7 Sparrow missiles onto the enemy jet. Squeezing the trigger he
called, “Fox One!” as the missile shot forward off its rail and arced
upwards, keeping the radar beam cast by the Hornet’s fire control system
in its sight the whole way.

The Soviet pilots of the patrol craft, belatedly aware of their danger
when their RWR began chirping, threw their large aircraft into a sharp
turn, trying to chart a perpendicular course to the incoming weapon. As
the Sparrow approached, the Russian pilot turned sharply again, bringing
the nose of the Badger around so that it was on as near a reciprocal
heading to the AIM-7 as he could manage in the short seconds he had. At
the same time, the copilot punched packets of chaff out the back of
their aircraft.

It worked. The Russians felt their aircraft buffet as the Sparrow
exploded into a chaff cloud several hundred meters to their rear.

The Hornet pilot swore into his oxygen mask. These damned Sparrows
sometimes seemed more trouble than they were worth. What he wouldn’t
give for a full load of the new AMRAAMs! Unfortunately, AIM-7s were what
he had to work with, for the moment, so he locked a second weapon onto
the Soviet bomber and fired. This time the engagement was more
favorable, since the crew of the Badger had needed to fly towards the
American jets in their evasion of the previous missile.

The second AIM-7 flew true, or nearly so. Chaff from the Tu-16 almost
threw off the missile’s lock, but it was close enough when its warhead
detonated for shrapnel to riddle the aircraft’s vertical stabilizer. For
a moment, the Soviet pilot though he might be all right as he wrestled
with the suddenly sluggish controls of his aircraft. But then the
stabilizer folded in half in the slipstream and the Badger began to
tumble wing over wing as it descended towards the vast ocean below.

“Scratch one!” called the American fighter pilot tiredly. It was hard to
get overly excited about shooting down a slow-moving recon bird when he
knew enemy fighters were inbound. “Shadow, what’s the status on those
Mig-31s, over?”

“Approaching from your east,” was the reply.

“Thunderbolt, this is Hawkeye,” called the controller on the E-2C that
was orbiting southwest of Enterprise, “we just picked those Migs up on
our scope here...they're moving your way fast, full afterburner, going
at least thirteen-hundred knots. Enemy count is eight, I say again eight
birds. Recommend you come to heading two seven zero and punch it to try
to get away, over.”

The pilots of Thunderbolt flight needed no encouragement. They had no
desire to try four-to-one odds under these circumstances. The streaking
Foxhounds would be able to overtake them anyway, since they had a
four-hundred knot advantage in speed. The American pilots just hoped to
lead the Russians on long enough that they would have to turn back for
lack of fuel. It was going to be close.

Third Post

Thunderbolt 3 and 4 pushed their Hornets as hard as they could, flying
west away from the squadron of Mig-31s that were in pursuit. It was a
losing race, and the pilots knew it. Before long they each heard the
familiar alarm of their respective radar warning receivers as the Soviet
pilots lit them up with their powerful fire control radars. The
Americans knew from the past two days experience that a pair of AA-6
Acrid missiles wouldn’t be far behind. Both men began twisting their
heads around in their canopies, trying to catch a glimpse of the
incoming weapons.

The Americans were now faced with an impossible choice. They could
continue on their course, westward on afterburner, giving the missiles
an easier target, or they could turn to try to evade the incoming AA-6s.
In the second case they stood a good chance of doing evading the first
volley, but doing so would allow the Soviet interceptors to close for a
better shot. Both pilots opted for a compromise between the two options,
flying S-turns on afterburner to try to throw off the missiles’ tracking
while at the same time launching chaff.

The tactic worked for the first volley of missiles. The AA-6s were
enormous missiles, the biggest air-to-air weapon ever put into serial
production, and though they flew at Mach 5, they were also ungainly.
What they lacked in maneuverability, however, they made up for in the
size of their powerful warhead. Both US fighter jocks felt their jets
buffet as the missiles exploded into chaff clouds in their wakes.

The reprieve was a temporary one, however. More AA-6s were on their way,
and this time from a closer range, as the Foxhound pilots had used the
time of the first missiles’ flight and the Americans’ evasive maneuvers
to lose the range. Two more missiles dove on the two F/A-18s from
behind. This time luck ran out for the flight leader. The huge Soviet
missile dove onto the American fighter and exploded into the jet’s back,
riddling the entire air frame and its pilot with shrapnel. The broken
Hornet fell from the sky, while Thunderbolt 4 continued west, having
evaded his missile.

Thunderbolt 4 was starting to despair for his own life when his RWR
suddenly went silent. “What’s going on, Hawkeye?” he called the E-2 to
the south.

“Bogeys have turned back, Thunderbolt,” came the reply. “Action to the
east. Maintain westerly heading, then come on back to the barn. Any
chute from your lead?”

“None,” was the forlorn reply.

Thunderbolt 3’s sacrifice had not been in vain, however. While the
Soviet Migs had been pursuing the Hornets, the two Tomcats from
Enterprise had ambushed and shot down the eastern Soviet recon Tu-16 and
chased off the Su-24. Unfortunately, the Badger had approached close
enough to have possibly detected the northeast corner of the battle
group’s formation, over which the projected arc of the Soviet snooper’s
radar had passed briefly. Shadow had detected a burst of radio
transmissions from the doomed aircraft before it died.

Back on *Enterprise* the CAG was saying, “I’d put odds at better than
even they found us. Batten down the hatches boys, this one’s going to be
a wild ride.”

Fourth Post

The destruction of the two Soviet maritime patrol aircraft had been a
victory, though tempered by the loss of one of *Enterprise*'s F/A-18s,
but now the battle group's crews were in a race to clear the area where
they had been detected by the eastern Tu-16 before the Soviets could
launch an effective attack against the carrier. They were hampered in
this endeavor, however, by the need to proceed cautiously for fear of
Soviet submarines. Still, *Enterprise* and her consorts made the best
speed they could on an easterly course, the Admiral planning to turn
south and then west eventually.

Now the signs began to turn ominous. The crewman aboard the ES-3A called
the flagship, saying, “We’re getting a lot of radio chatter coming from
the direction of Iceland, I mean a LOT. Same signature as the before the
strikes we’ve seen the past couple of days, sir.”

The CAG considered this. He would need to launch every serviceable
aircraft before the strike came in, but launch too early and he could
get caught with pilots running out of fuel just as the attack was coming
in, which would be almost as bad as having them on the deck. The air
group commander considered his options.

“All right,” he said after a moment, “let’s start launching aircraft. My
gut says the Russians are coming. High endurance airframes first.”

On deck the *Big E*’s crew began launching the carrier’s support
aircraft. The two ready EA-6B electronic warfare jets took off first,
followed by the other ready E-2C, and a pair of A-6s configured as
tankers. Then the fighters began to launch, and the CAG felt
increasingly uneasy about how few warplanes he could actually put in the
air. More than that, *Enterprise*’s magazines were so low that many of
the aircraft he could launch would only be able to rearm once more.

The first pair of F-14s thundered down the deck, pushed by their steam
catapults and then rising awkwardly into the air on their extended swing
wings. As the next pair were spotting for their takeoff, the monitors on
the Shadow ELINT bird called again to report, “Picking up fighter radars
from the north...multiple sources, no good count yet. These aren’t the
Mig-31s from earlier...computer says the radars are Su-27s.”

“ETA?” asked the CAG over the radio.

“None yet sir, but their coming on a pretty broad front, like a sweep.”

That was bad news, the CAG knew. He needed his own fighters engaging
bombers and missiles, not enemy interceptors. Two more Tomcats roared
off the deck, while a pair of AMRAAM armed Hornets spotted on the number
three and four catapults. There were precious few of these wonderful
missiles left. They would need to use them wisely. Moreover, only a few
Phoenix missiles remained as well, meaning that the Americans would
often be out-ranged by Soviet AA-10s in any coming engagement with the
dangerous Flankers Shadow was reporting.

The American fighters began to congregate in holding patterns north of
the carrier as the Shadow continued to report. Then the Russian aircraft
began to enter the radar coverage of the E-2Cs, who could provide range
to the bogeys, and numbers.

“Fifteen...eighteen...looks like more than two dozen inbound contacts
and climbing,” called the controller on the AWACS bird.

The CAG let out a low whistle. More than two dozen Flankers inbound?
This was bad news. He couldn’t afford more heavy losses to his air
group. This was going to take some smart fighting for his pilots to
survive. Fortunately, they had worked out a plan in the lull of the
previous night. It wasn’t perfect, but maybe it would keep the Russian
horde at bay...

“All flights,” the CAG called, “we’ll be executing plan Bravo, over.”

As the somewhat ragtag bank of American fighters shook themselves out
into a prearranged formation and the support E-2s, S-3s, and EA-6s
turned south, nearly three dozen Su-27 interceptors approached from the
north, spread out on a nearly two-hundred-mile front.

Fifth Post

As the regiment of Soviet Sukhoi interceptors came on, the American
naval aviators split their diverse aircraft, which carried an even more
diverse array of weapons, into two mixed groups. The support aircraft,
E-2Cs, ES-3As, S-3Bs, and tanker-configured A-6s, all turned south to
clear the anticipated area of aerial combat. The pilots of the two
groups of fighters turned east and west respectively, moving to place
themselves on the flanks of the hundred-mile-wide Soviet sweep. As the
two groups separated, they also spread themselves out into deep
formations according to the weapons carried by each airframe.

The crews aboard the two airborne Hawkeyes, one controlling each fighter
group, tracked the approaching massed Soviet formation. After two days
of hard fighting, the *Enterprise* air group could put up barely twenty
fighters to face nearly twice as many of the potent Flankers. Moreover,
the air group's stocks to long-range Phoenixes and fire-and-forget
AMRAAMs were dangerously low, as were the numbers of aircraft that could
carry them. Much of the airborne American force would be fighting this
engagement with older and far less capable AIM-7 Sparrow missiles.

The line of Soviet fighters was now within a hundred and fifty miles and
closing. The lead Russian pilots were beginning to pick up their
American adversaries on radar. They adjusted their courses accordingly,
some of the Soviets veering east and others west. Unfortunately, a third
group continued on dues south, straight towards Enterprise and her
escorts. The range between the opposing warplanes was now a hundred
miles, and the Soviet pilots pushed they throttles forward to close this
last dangerous stretch of air as quickly as possible.

Now the Americans sprang into action. Each of the two formations,
southwest and southeast of the oncoming Russians, contained a pair of
AIM-54 toting F-14s in their lead. The crews of these interceptors now
began to volley off their load of big missiles, the RIOs in the back
seat selecting targets, while the pilots fired as quickly as they could,
accompanying their attacks with calls of "Fox Three!" Over the radio
net. Phoenixes leapt of their rails and accelerated into a Mach 5 flight
path, arcing ballistically towards the approaching Sukhois.

The Russian pilots continued on towards their American assailants,
accelerating again as they kicked in their afterburners. The Tomcat
drivers were already turning away to flee from the more numerous
Russians as the Phoenixes tipped over and dove into the flocks of
Flankers. The active-homing seekers of the big AIM-54s sought out and
locked onto individual targets, flashing downward at five times the
speed of sound. The Soviet pilots unlucky enough to receive attention
from the missiles' electronic brains twisted and turned their
maneuverable fighters upon hearing the warbling of their RWRs, to good
effect.

Missiles began to explode in ugly puffs of fire, smoke and shrapnel
among the Russian jets. Given fair warning of the attack, most of the
pilots were able to evade the incoming weapons through a combination of
hard maneuvering and chaff decoys. But not all. Five Soviet jets
sustained hits, the powerful warheads of the AIM-54s shattering the jets
and sending them spinning downwards towards the North Atlantic.

The enraged survivors in the Soviet formations continued on towards the
less numerous Americans. The range closed to fifty miles, then twenty
five. At twenty miles the next layer of the American formation began to
engage. The pilots of the F/A-18Cs carrying AIM-120 AMRAAMs began to
volley off their dangerous missiles as fast as they could select
targets. At the same time, the Russians also began to launch, though
their weapons of choice were the semi-active homing AA-10s, which
required guidance from the launching aircraft. Once the Americans' rails
were empty, they turned away and punched their afterburners, while the
Soviet pilots had to keep their radars pointed at their targets for the
entire length of their missiles' flight.

This unequal engagement produced predictable results. The Russian pilots
faced a pair of bad options. They could maintain their course to guide
their own missiles to the target, which left them vulnerable to the
incoming AMRAAMs, or they could turn to evade, in which case their
missiles would lose lock. Most decided to grimly press ahead with the
first option. American missiles began to blot away more Su-27s, causing
the AA-10s attached to these fighters' radars to lose lock and continue
blindly until they ran out of propellant. The toll on the Soviet
fighters now stood at eleven.

For the rest of the Soviet missiles targeted at the retreating Hornets,
the result was no better. The Americans' turn to the south had thrown
off the geometry of the Soviets' engagement windows, meaning that the
Russian missiles did not possess the range to hunt down the retreating
Hornets, and one AA-10 after another lost power and fell towards the
sea. But before this happened American Sparrow missiles from the third
layer of the US formation were already flashing into the depleted Soviet
formation.

Taking advantage of the Soviets' preoccupation with the AMRAAM toting
Hornets, the American pilots of the remaining Sparrow-armed F-14s and
F/A-18s took advantage of the extended range of their AIM-7s to engage
the Soviets, who continued to bore onwards on their broad front sweep.
The Americans had learned over the past week of conflict that the winner
in a battle of semi-active radar homing missiles was usually the one who
fired first. The Americans had engineered a situation to guarantee that
they would be the first to engage. The Sparrows arced towards the
survivors in the two groups of engaged Flankers, and now the Soviets
engaged as well. The Russians faced the same dilemma as against the
AMRAAM-armed Hornets, except this time Americans could not turn away
after launching their own missiles.

The AIM-7s lanced into the Russian fighters, exploding in dirty puffs
the smashed four more Sukhois from the sky. As their missiles reached
targets, the Americans of the third wave turned to evade. More Russian
missiles, deprived of their guiding aircraft, lost their lock, but some
continued on, guided by the grimly determined survivors, eager to begin
to exact some revenge. Now the Americans activated the fourth and final
layer of their plan.

Behind each mixed group of American fighters flew an EA-6B Prowler,
which airframes housed a powerful suite of electronic jammers. The crews
of these aircraft had kept their electronic countermeasure quiet until
this moment. Now they activated their equipment, sending powerful beams
of electronic noise past the retreating American jets and into the
seekers of the AA-10 missiles. Most of the remaining Russian missiles
lost their lock, their seekers overwhelmed by the jamming being emitted
by the Prowlers. But not all. Two AA-10s now found their mark, blotting
an F-14 from the western group and an F/A-18 from the one to the east.
Already, however, the first group of American Tomcat jocks had turned
and were boring in to launch their Sparrows after having expended their
Phoenixes earlier.

The Americans had done much to even the odds, downing fifteen of
thirty-six Soviet jets. But now the Russians held the advantage. Though
they now only slightly outnumbered their American adversaries, the
Su-27s each carried nearly a full load of missiles, while the Americans
had all but expended their long-range ordnance. The easy time for the US
Navy aviators was now over. The Russian survivors, seeing red for the
loss of so many of their comrades, bored in for revenge.

Sixth Post

Now the American fighter pilots ran from the oncoming Russians. The
Soviet pilots bored in, their radars burning through the jamming from
the EA-6Bs and allowing their AA-10s to begin scoring kills. Two more
Hornets fell to the Soviet weapons before the Tomcats that had initiated
the engagement with their Phoenixes turned to cover the withdrawal of
the other jets with their remaining Sparrow missiles. In the ensuing
exchange the sides exchanged a Tomcat for a Flanker, but bought time for
the remainder of the American jets to break contact south.

The Flanker drivers pursued until…until their look-down radars began to
reveal the blips representing the ships of the Enterprise battle group.
A ring of dots materialized on their screens surrounding one large blip.
The American planes continued south, passing on either side of their
home carrier. A minute later, the Soviet jets swept overhead, slowing
and beginning to circle when their reached the airspace over the
American ships.

Below on *Enterprise*, the task force commander, Admiral D’Amada, sent
out a message to his captains, “Do not engage! Save your missiles. Those
fighters can’t hurt us.”

Now a bizarre situation developed. The savaged formation of Soviet
fighters held sway over the airspace above an American aircraft carrier,
whose escorts still possessed the missiles to shoot them down. However,
the general shortage of missiles kept the ships from engaging. The
Soviet pilots, realizing this and also lacking any anti-ship munitions,
remained at high altitude where the ships’ guns could not disturb them.
Thus, an uneasy calm existed, the Soviets at high altitude, the
Americans on the surface, with their own warplanes circling to the
south.

The Soviet fighter jocks did possess one weapon they could use, however:
their radios. The call went out to the Russian control aircraft circling
far to the north, just south of Iceland, who repeated the message to the
bombers, lurking nearby, and to the captured airfield at Keflavik.

Aboard Enterprise, Admiral D’Amada heard the report called from the
ES-3A, “Surface-search radars approaching from the northwest…”

The Soviet long-range maritime strike regiment had departed the Kola
hours before and passed through the Denmark strait, west of Iceland. The
Russians had anticipated that the Enterprise would move west during the
night, not east as the carrier group had actually done, and now the
Backfires and Blinders were out of position, though not irretrievably
so. Upon receiving the report of the carrier’s true position, the
commander of the regiment ordered a course change, and the twenty-four
big jets turned had turned southeast.

Sixth Post

The crew aboard the ES-3A were the first to detect the oncoming Russian
heavies. Four old Tu-22 Blinder bombers (confusingly similar terminology
as the larger and more capable Tu-22M3 Backfires) spread out in a line
abreast, radars and powerful jammers on and radiating, and streaked
southeast to get their own fix on the American carrier’s position.

Aboard Enterprise, the CAG, in the uncomfortable position of giving
orders to his airborne fighters to the south while being beneath Soviet
fighter cover over the fleet, considered his options. He only had a few
surviving planes in the air carrying the long range Sparrow missiles.
The rest were down to just Sidewinders. The Sparrows would have to do.
He ordered a quartet of F-14s with six AIM-7s between them to head
northwest on an intercept course.

Minutes passed as the Blinders and Tomcats closed with each other.
Behind the Tu-22s the western E-2C was starting to pick up through the
electronic haze the formation of a full regiment of Backfire bombers.
When in range, the Tomcat RIOs switched on their powerful radars and
began locking their radar-homing missiles onto the oncoming screen of
Blinders. Missiles leapt of the F-14s’ rails, but even as they engaged
flights of Su-27s were turning west to pursue the impetuous Americans.

The first AIM-7 completed its flight to the Blinders...and missed in the
confusion of jamming and chaff. The American pilot immediately reengaged
with his last remaining Sparrow. The next two missiles connected,
causing the Tu-22s to fly through deadly clouds of shrapnel which
shredded their cockpits and engines, sending the big aircraft tumbling
towards the vast ocean below. The third Sparrow also missed, but the
last Blinder fell to the last AIM-7 carried by the airborne portion of
Enterprise’s air group.

Now the controllers on the E-2 called to F-14 jocks, “Come southwest and
kick it! You’ve got Flankers inbound at three o’clock!”

The half dozen dangerous Soviets interceptors came on, the Russian
pilots launching AA-10s as soon as they were within range of the fleeing
Americans. The effect, even if their missiles did not connect, was to
force the Americans away from the oncoming flock of Backfires. Of the
first volley of Russian air-to-air missiles, all missed. However, the
Russians were able to close the range as the American fighters
maneuvered to evade.

The Soviet pilots were just locking their radars onto the now closer
American jets to fire a second, more effective volley of AA-10s, when
the American aviators heard over their radio nets, "This is Red Rippers
lead, I have the bogeys on my scope. Tallyho! Fox Three!"

Four F-14Ds, which had taken off from the USS *Carl Vinson* eight
hundred miles to the southwest, formed the lead flight of the entire
inbound Red Rippers squadron. They had launched from the other carrier
upon the first signs of a coordinate Russian strike upon *Enterprise*,
refueled halfway from Air Force tankers out of Goose Bay, and now were
joining the fray with full loads of Phoenix missiles and Sparrows.

AIM-54s ripped into the Russian formation. Those Soviet pilots who did
not die in the initial onslaught turned tail and ran as the fresh
American fighters pressed.

The timely arrival of the *Vinson*'s air group was enough to save
Enterprise's embattled air cover, but what about the carrier itself? To
the northwest, the first Tu-22M3s had reached launch range for their
AS-4 Kitchen anti-ship missiles. The Russians had been sweeping
southwest and been forced to reorient to the southeast to attack the
American battle group, meaning that the Backfires came on in a stream
rather than a line. In pairs, one after another, the Soviet bombers
launched their massive missiles and then turned northeast for home.
*Vinson*'s fighters had arrived too late to interfere, and forty
missiles now streaked towards the American carrier.

Seventh Post

The quartet of F-14s from the *Vinson* now, at the direction of the crew
aboard the western E-2C, broke off their pursuit of the surviving
Flankers and instead started targeting the stream of AS-4s burning
towards the Enterprise group at almost Mach 5. More Phoenixes leapt of
the rails of the big Tomcats, arcing northeast into the flank of the
missile stream. The acute angle of the attack degraded the effectiveness
of the American weapons, and the AIM-54s knocked down only a handful of
the AS-4s, called Kh-22s (X-22 in Cyrillic) by the Russians.

The American pilots closed to engage with their Sparrows, but now the
surviving Su-27 pilots turned and made another run at their antagonists.
AA-10s and AIM-7s crisscrossed the sky with contrails in the air above
the big anti-ship missiles as the Soviet and American fliers battled
each other. Two more Sukhois fell at the cost of one F-14 before the
rest of *Enterprise*’s air group joined the fray, finally driving the
few surviving Russians north for good. The brief Soviet dominance of the
sky over an American carrier was over, with over ninety percent of the
advanced interceptors that had participated in the attack destroyed.
Even so, they had accomplished their mission. Other than the initial
Phoenixes fired by the oncoming Tomcat-drivers from *Vinson*, the
American fliers had been completely unable to interfere with either the
Backfire bombers to the northwest or the missiles they had launched. It
would be up to the carrier group’s depleted defenses to protect
*Enterprise* from the remaining thirty-six incoming weapons.

As the E-2C controllers reported the lead Soviet missiles entering the
engagement envelope of the carrier’s consorts, the crews of the Aegis
cruisers USS *Cowpens* and USS *Anzio* energized their powerful SPY-1
radars. They quickly detected the missiles approaching from the
northwest, and SM-2 missiles began exploding out of the VLS cells on
both ships. SAMs and anti-ship missiles closed with each other at
incredible speed, and then the American missiles began to explode,
filling the air in front of the AS-4s with expanding clouds of shrapnel.

The accuracy of the American missiles was good, but not perfect. Several
of the Soviet missiles required re-engagement, which took attention away
from the more distant Russian weapons in the stream. More importantly,
the misses taxed the rapidly diminishing supply of SAMs among the
escorts. *Cowpens* was the first to empty her diminished magazines,
followed soon after by *Anzio*, and still several of the big Russian
missiles remained, coming on relentlessly.

Now the Sea Sparrows aboard *Enterprise* and the escorting
Spruance-class destroyers joined in, but Cowpens, closest to the
incoming missiles, was too distant to benefit completely from their
protection. Two missiles headed for the cruiser. One fell to a Sea
Sparrow from Enterprise, but the second bored in. Now the cruiser’s
Phalanx CIWS went into automatic mode to defend the ship. The
twenty-millimeter rotary Vulcan cannon rotated and tracked on the
incoming target. When the targeting computer judged that the weapon was
oriented correctly, the barrels began to rotate a moment before an
intense BRRRRRRRRT announced six thousand rounds per minute tearing
downrange.

The short burst by the cannon sent several hundred rounds arcing towards
a calculated intercept point with the missile. Of these, two connected,
the second of which detonated the AS-4s warhead while it was still half
a kilometer away from the ship. *Cowpens* was safe, but several missiles
still headed for other ships in the formation, three of them targeting
the carrier. *Enterprise*’s Sea Sparrow launcher emptied, and these
shorter-ranged missiles ended the threat to the flagship. Crews aboard
the *Big E* now worked to reload the awkward launchers as fast as
possible. The last incoming missile headed toward the old cruiser
*Yarnel*, whose crew shot it down with one of their SM-1ER missiles. And
then the sky was empty of incoming threats, the few surviving Sukhois
fleeing north, and the remnants of *Enterprise*’s air group, joined by
growing numbers of reinforcements from *Vinson*, returning to the sky
above the carrier to reestablish control over their floating airfield.

Admiral D’Amada took stock of his task force’s situation. As reports
began to come in from the other ships of the force, he heaved a sigh of
relief. Not a single Russian missile had struck an American ship,
despite a couple of close calls. Then his mood darkened as the ships’
captains began to call in their supply status. The only ready SAMs left
in the fleet were seven SM-1s aboard the ancient *Yarnell*, and a few
Sea Sparrows on the *Spruance*-class destroyers *Thorne* and *O’Bannon*.
*Enterprise*’s crew would be able to reload her launchers, eventually,
but this did not affect the calculus markedly; the battle group would
not be able to survive another such attack.

Eighth Post

With the air and missile engagement over, for now, and with his battle
group’s stocks of SAMs almost completely depleted, Admiral D’Amada
decided that it was time for the better part of valor. “Message to all
ships,” he dictated, “increase speed to full and make our course
one-eight-zero. We need to clear the area as quickly as possible and
open the distance between us and Iceland.” The ring of ships with the
massive carrier in the middle turned south as they propellers churned
the water behind.

To the west and southwest, two Soviet submarines had been working
eastward over the past several hours, guided be reports from maritime
patrol aircraft and other sensors around the north Atlantic. The
northern of the two, a *Sierra II*, was the more dangerous, but the
southern one, a *Victor III*, had the better angle. The battle group’s
turn gave the crews of both nuc boats the opportunity to close with the
American ships, which had up to that point been steaming directly away.
But with proximity to the American carrier came danger for the Soviet
boats as well.

The air battle had briefly forced the crews of the ASW helicopters of
the American screen to cease operations and return to their ships or
flee south to escape the Flankers that had briefly roamed freely above
Enterprise, but now they returned to their duties with determination.
The crew of an SH-60, patrolling along the western flank of the task
force, was the first to get a hit on the quiet *Sierra*, using its
dipping sonar. They were soon joined by one of *Big E*’s S-3 Vikings,
whose crew proceeded to drop a pattern of sonobuoys to try to localize
the target. Also joining the hunt was a P-3C Orion out of Gander.
Altogether the crews manning the three aircraft flooded a relatively
small area with enough sensors to achieve a rapid fix on the stealthy
Soviet boat, whose captain to this point was unaware of the danger which
his command was in.

His ignorance was rectified a few minutes later when the crew of the
P-3, after making one pass to achieve a MAD fix, circled back and
dropped a Mk46 torpedo directly into the *Sierra*’s wake. The Soviet
crew never had a chance. In seconds the lightweight torpedo slammed into
the sub’s spinning screw and exploded, rupturing the casing of the
propeller shaft and flooding the engine compartment in seconds, which in
turn dragged the rest of the boat into the depths of the Atlantic.

Farther south, the *Victor* stalking the formation did no better. The
crew aboard the American *Spruance*-class destroyer USS *O’Bannon*, now
refocused on their primary ASW role after the drama of the air battle,
detected the Soviet submarine on the destroyer’s towed sonar array. Soon
the hull sonar had a fix as well and a pair of helicopters were
converging on the area roughly triangulated by the two sensors. The
addition of the helicopters’ dipping sonars quickly localized the
contact, and a pair of MK46s dispatched a second Soviet submarine in the
span of thirty minutes.

The threat to *Enterprise* was not yet over, however. In the carrier’s
flag bridge, Admiral D’Amada heard his N2 report, “Sir, the Shadows are
picking up a lot of chatter coming from the direction of Keflavik. They
say it sounds like another strike coming in.”

The admiral swore. Didn’t these Soviets ever run out of airplanes? The
bulk of a squadron of *Vinson*’s Tomcats were now circling just west of
*Enterprise*, and the lull had allowed the carrier’s deck crews to
recover the survivors from the air battle and launch some replacements,
but even so another determined push by the Russians might be enough to
overwhelm the task force. His ships certainly did not possess enough
munitions to repel another missile strike. It was absolutely imperative
that any striking aircraft be destroyed or turned back before they
launched.

As the minutes ticked by more reports from the ES-3A crew confirmed that
another large strike was indeed airborne and approaching from due north,
the direction of Iceland. With little choice, *Enterprise*’s CAG ordered
every available aircraft with an air-to-air missile north into the teeth
of the Soviets’ own CAP to meet the threat as far from the flat top as
possible.

Ninth Post

As the American fighters flew north and the Russians south, the
situation south of Iceland began to crystallize on the screens of the
controllers aboard the E-2Cs. Only a few Su-27s remained for the
Americans to deal with, but a CAP of dangerous Mig-31s still remained to
support them. These turned south to engage as the Soviets’ own EW
aircraft crews detected the approaching radars emitting from the
oncoming Tomcats and Hornets. The Americans were advancing with the jets
from the two carriers abreast, *Vinson*’s birds on the left and
*Enterprise*’s on the right.

Behind the Soviet fighters, a regiment of twenty Su-24 Fencers had
formed up over Iceland’s southeast peninsula and were now coming south,
each carrying a pair of either AS-17 Krypton anti-radiation or AS-18
Kazoo anti-ship missiles. Their forty missiles was far more than enough
to overwhelm the depleted defenses of the carrier group, and while the
smaller missiles may not have the same massive punch as the big AS-4s,
they were nonetheless dangerous.

The first of the opposing aircraft to make contact and engage were the
fresh flights of *Enterprise* F-14s and Soviet Mig-31 CAP out of
Reykjavik with their big, long-ranged Phoenix and AA-6 missiles,
respectively. Both sides were supported by jammer aircraft, which
decreased the accuracy of the missiles as they arced past each other
going north and south. Those aircraft targeted on both sides twisted and
turned to avoid the incoming weapons. Most survived, but three Mig-31s
and one F-14 were smashed by shrapnel from the exploding warheads,
sending planes and crew tumbling toward the dark ocean below. By then
the Enterprise’s AMRAAM-armed F/A-18s had closed to within range of the
Soviet interceptors, neutralizing the bigger Soviet jets’ advantage in
range. AIM-120s flew off the rails of the nimble American fighters and
shot forward towards the five remaining Foxhounds at the same time as a
second volley of AA-6s separated from the Soviet aircraft.

While the Enterprise pilots tangled with the Soviet CAP, the regiment of
Fencers continued relentlessly south, closing the distance with the
maximum range release point for their missiles. Just a few minutes more
and they would be able to launch and turn back for the safety of the
Iceland defenses.

But it was not to be for the Russian pilots. While *Enterprise*’s
battered air group completed the destruction of the Russian CAP, losing
another F/A-18 in the process, the eight F-14s from *Vinson* swept in
from the southwest, the Tomcats’ pilots and RIOs launching their full
loads of AIM-54s as quickly as they could lock onto the Soviet attack
jets. In seconds dozens of American missiles were in the air and the
first were just nosing down into the formation of Su-24s. The Soviet
pilots screamed to each other over the radio net, trying to determine
where this devastating attack was coming from. While the Phoenixes were
still dropping into the Soviet formation, the American pilots, who had
now closed to Sparrow range, began loosing their medium range weapons at
yet more of the Fencers.

By now the Russian formation was in tatters as those jets that had so
far survived the American missiles jinked and dove to evade yet more.
The AIM-7s now arrived, tearing even more holes in the Soviet ranks, and
then the Tomcats were in among the Fencers, contrails from AIM-9
Sidewinders crisscrossing the sky as the line of American jets passed
through flock of Soviet jets from west to east. The Soviet pilots,
though, were not completely defenseless. One of the Soviet pilots
managed to lock a short-ranged air-to-air missile onto the hot tailpipes
of a Tomcat and shatter the American jet with a snapshot.

But this was a solitary victory in the unfolding disaster. After the
line of Tomcats swept through, the rest of the *Enterprise*’s group of
fighters, fresh from dispatching the last of the Mig-31s, swept in from
the south, AMRAAMs, Sparrows, and Sidewinders smashing Sukhoi after
Sukhoi. A pair of surviving Flankers tried to intervene and managed to
down another Hornet, but then fell themselves to missiles from multiple
American aircraft in a twisting dogfight. Both groups of American jets
pulled sharp turns and swept back into the surviving attack jets, some
of the American pilots now down to the ammunition in their Vulcan
cannons. One more pass by the Americans and the sky was empty of Soviet
jets.

As the last broken Fencer splashed into the icy waters of the north
Atlantic below, the American fighters turned back south for the skies of
the carrier they had just fought, and sacrificed some of their comrades,
to save.

Tenth Post

The aerial and submarine threat to *Enterprise* had been defeated, but
the threat to the *Vinson* group, steaming at full speed west of
Labrador to relieve *Big E*, was just beginning. Throughout the night
the Vinson group continued on its northeasterly course as the
*Enterprise* steamed south and then southwest, away from the Soviet
threat on Iceland and towards the *Monongahela* replenishment group.
*Vinson* fighters continued to augment the CAP over *Enterprise*, which
had expended the last of its AIM-54s and AIM-120s in the final defeat of
the Fencer strike hours before.

To the north, the Russian air group was licking its wounds. An entire
regiment of Su-24s and most of a regiment of Su-27s had been lost trying
to overcome the Enterprise’s defenses. They had come within a hair’s
breadth of succeeding, though the surviving Soviets didn’t know how
close, other than that the intervention of the other American carrier’s
air group had come at a bad time. Spirits were low among the pilots at
the rapidly expanding bases at Reykjavik and Keflavik.

But directly in the path of the oncoming USS *Carl Vinson*, the crew of
the *Sierra II*-class submarine *Mars* were buoyant. Their captain had
managed to position his boat directly astride the American carrier’s
course. Now the *Mars* was lurking to the southwest at a quiet five
knots, and the American screen was approaching at twenty.

“Captain,” the lead Soviet sonar officer reported, “an American frigate,
directly ahead. Reciprocal bearing to us. Range eight thousand meters.”

This was the moment the Soviet captain had been waiting for. Reports
from other theater were indicating that attempts to penetrate the
American ASW screens around their carriers were not successful. He would
try a new strategy: attacking the screen itself. He was confident in the
ability of his boat to remain hidden in the confusion of sinking and
burning enemy surface ships.

“Prepare a firing solution,” the captain ordered, “two torpedoes against
the contact.”

Aboard the American *Perry*-Class frigate USS *Kauffman*, the sonar crew
was having trouble hearing anything through the cavitation noises of
their own screws as the warship plowed through the choppy North Atlantic
at high speed. The captain didn’t like the situation his command was in,
leading with their face, so to speak, but *Enterprise* needed help and
that meant a speed run for the *Vinson* group. The American officer was
just frowning over his vulnerabilities for the hundredth time when his
worst fears were confirmed.

“Captain!” called the sonar room. “Torpedoes in the water! High speed
screws, one-o’clock, constant bearing. I estimate range as five thousand
yards!”

“Hard right rudder!” the captain ordered, then, “stream the Nixie!”

The Nixie torpedo decoy unreeled behind the American warship, emitting
sounds designed to entice the seekers aboard the Soviet weapons to
attack it, rather than the ship. It worked. The first torpedo lunged at
the towed decoy, crossing behind the tail of the American frigate and
plowing harmlessly onward. The second torpedo, however, ran true. The
big weapon closed with the *Kauffman* before running under the ship’s
keel and exploding. The resulting cavity beneath the frigate broke the
ship’s back. It broke in half and sank in minutes, taking most of the
American crew into the dark depths of the oceans.

The reaction of the American screen was swift, far more so than the
*Mars*’s captain had anticipated. Before the two halves of *Kauffman*
had even slipped beneath the waves, the airborne S-3 from *Vinson* along
with two ASW helos were already combing bearing from which the enemy
weapons had come. Before long a thick pattern of sonobuoys both above
and below the layer began to return the sounds of a modern nuclear
submarine closing with the oncoming carrier. A few minutes more, and the
S-3 crew achieved a MAD contact on the Russian boat. Within less than
half an hour, two Mk46 air-dropped torpedoes had ended the most serious
threat to *Carl Vinson*’s progress, at the cost of one of the carrier’s
escorts.

The next twenty-four hours were uneventful in the North Atlantic. The
Soviets retained an uncommitted regiment of Su-24s postured to strike an
American carrier, but the Soviet commander on Iceland decided on the
better half of valor rather than flinging them against a fully equipped
American carrier group. He would bide his time for a better opportunity.

The *Enterprise* group, having survived by the skin of its collective
teeth, rendezvoused with the *Monongahela* long enough to take on vital
stores, then continued on at high speed to Norfolk where a comprehensive
replenishment would take place. With the changing of the guard in the
north Atlantic complete, the Americans began to look forward to their
own offensive plans: retaking Iceland.
