**Northern Fury 7, Keflavik Capers**

**AAR By Joel Radunzel**

Post 1

Ok, here’s the latest installment in the Northern Fury AAR series.
Here’s the setup: There’s some serious business going down in Norway
around Trondheim. Jan Mayen was seized in a *coup de main* yesterday and
one *Kuznetsov* battle group and one *Kiev* battle group are likely
headed towards us here on Iceland. The airfield at Keflavik was shut
down yesterday by a major missile attack in which five missiles got
through our defenses to destroy two F-15s on the ground and cratered the
runways. We’ve got two AMRAAM-capable replacements inbound from the
States, but the rest of our squadron of Eagles are older variants that
can only carry AIM-7s. The runways are now repaired. There are also a
pair of AWACS, some P-3s, some SAR C-130s and HH-60s, and an assortment
of other transports and support aircraft parked around the base. The
base is defended by one Patriot and one Hawk missile battery. Effective,
but their ammo is not limitless.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf7\nf7_jr\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:5.33333in" alt="Map Description automatically generated" />

All of the US carriers are out of position right now, leaving a small
ASW group, TG 84.1, in the Denmark Strait patrolling for the expected
surge of Soviet subs. This group consists of the Spruance-class
destroyer USS *John Rogers* accompanied by one US and one Canadian
frigate. Further south is the cruiser USS *Vella Gulf*, which is
escorting the LPD USS *Trenton* back to the US from Europe. The HDMS
*Vaederen*, unlikely survivor of the attack on Jan Mayen yesterday (see
my Cold and Lonely Place AAR) is still shepherding the fishing fleet
south. The only other naval strength in the area are two Icelandic Coast
Guard cutters, the *Tyr* and the *Aegir* north and south of Iceland
respectively.

Military families and dependents are being evacuated from Keflavik as
quickly as they can be loaded on the C-5s and C-141s parked on the ramp.
The Icelandic government is conducting a far larger evacuation of
citizens from the outlying towns around the perimeter of the island,
moving them to Reykjavik in anticipation of sending at least the women
and children on to North America in chartered flights. There is a cruise
ship, the SS *Arctic Traveler*, which has already taken a load of 2,500
evacuees out of Reykjavik, and several charter flights are scheduled to
depart shortly.

Our mission is ill-defined right now. We don’t know if the Russians are
coming our way but I suspect they are. If so, we likely won’t be able to
hold, not with a *Kuznetsov* and its air wing of Su-33s to contend with.
Let’s dive in and see how the situation develops!

Post 2

The air control party at NAS Keflavik nervously scanned their threat
boards as the E-3 AWACS circling southwest of Iceland fed them data.
Signs to the north were growing increasingly troubling. The airborne
radar had not picked up any bogeys yet, but threat receivers were
reporting Russian radars in action up that way. Outside on the tarmac
several C-5s and C-141s were prepping for take-off. Families from the
base's garrison were boarding the big transports for the flights to
Maine and Canada, out of harm’s way. The wives and children shivered as
they crossed the icy pavements to board the uncomfortable military
aircraft. Getting those hulking jets off the ground was both a military
and a personal priority for the entire base.

As the first C-5 began its painfully slow takeoff down one of Keflavik's
long runways, the technicians on the E-3 were also tracking numerous
small charter aircraft taking off from the small airstrips that serviced
the communities around the perimeter of the island, bringing civilians
from these outlying towns to the capital of Reykjavik, where chartered
airliners were waiting to carry many on to Greenland and North America.
Inter-continental passenger flights were also passing over Iceland,
following the great circle routes from Europe to North America.

As the Air Force monitors tracked these movements, ominous signs began
to develop to the north of Iceland's northwestern Westfjords Peninsula.
Pairs of aircraft were approaching, one behind another. These were
quickly identified as Su-33s by their radar emissions. Somewhere beyond
them then was one of the *Kuznetsov*-class carriers. More pairs
continued to appear on the screens of the AWACS controllers and in the
military radar facilities that dotted the perimeter of Iceland, until
they were tracking a full eighteen Soviet fighters. Only two F-15s were
currently orbiting over central Iceland, and the air controllers
immediately ordered the other two ready flights into the air. A Soviet
sweep of Icelandic airspace seemed imminent, and the idea of
high-performance interceptors in and among the lumbering transports
departing Keflavik was a nightmare for more reasons than one.

The lead Soviet pilots banked their naval fighters into a holding
pattern off Iceland's north coast, allowing the full weight of the
Russian squadron coming behind them to assemble before they began their
sweep. The six American Eagle pilots and their airborne controllers had
little time to set up an ambush to try to offset their three-to-one
numerical inferiority before the Russians came charging south. Knowing
that the Russians lacked any long-range surveillance radars, the air
controllers decided on some misdirection. All of the American fighters
would approach with their own radars off until the time came to launch
their long-range Sparrows. This would hopefully allow the Americans to
attack from multiple directions and minimize the Russians' situational
awareness. A second, backstop ambush could also be sprung if the
Russians were aggressive enough.

As the full weight of the Soviet sweep turned south, the pilots of four
of the F-15s went to military power and approached the enemy formation
from the southwest. When the AWACS controllers reported they were in
range, the Eagle jocks flipped on their radars, each acquiring one
target, and loosed a volley of eight AIM-7 Sparrows at the distant
Russians. The elite Russian pilots responded immediately, turning into
the threat and going to afterburner to close the range. But the Sparrows
had longer legs than the Russians' R-27s (NATO reporting name AA-10
Alamo). Both weapons, however, had the disadvantage of being semi-active
radar homing, meaning the launching aircraft had to keep its radar
pointed at the target for the missile's entire flight.

The Sparrows flashed into the oncoming formation of blue and grey
painted Soviet jets. The notoriously ineffective AIM-7s did well,
exploding into the paths of the oncoming Soviet pilots who had just
launched their own missiles. Three of the four double-target Su-33s were
shredded, the pilots killed in a cloud of shrapnel. Now the American
pilots banked violently and punched their afterburners, fleeing before
the volley of approaching AA-10s. Several of the Russian missiles had
been launched by pilots and jets that were now tumbling into the north
Atlantic. These lost lock and continued on harmlessly. Many more,
however, continued to close the distance to the fleeing F-15s.

The Americans almost managed to escape the counterattack unharmed, but
one R-27 at the end of its range exploded behind the rearmost Eagle,
shredding its port wing and engine and sending it into an uncontrollable
spin. The pilot did not eject.

The Soviets continued to pursue, but now the Americans sprung their
trap. The other two F-15 pilots had been quietly approaching from the
southeast. They now flipped on their radars and launched four sparrows
into the flank of the Russian formation. The Sparrows' 50% accuracy was
barely enough again to blot two Su-33s from the sky. Now, however, the
Russians' advantage in numbers began to tell. Half of the thirteen
surviving Russian pilots continued to pursue the three F-15s fleeing to
the southwest, while the rest turned and counterattacked the two
flanking Eagles with another volley of R-27s.

The two American pilots turned and burned, following the same tactic as
their comrades to the west, but it failed to save one of them from being
smashed by shrapnel from an exploding Russian missile. The score now
stood at five Sukois splashed against two F-15s. The Americans pushed
their interceptors to the limit now, streaking south towards Keflavik
with the Soviet flyers in hot pursuit. The geometry of the engagement
allowed the Russians to barely catch and bring down a third Eagle as the
battle passed over Reykjavik. Two more Eagles rocketed down the Runway
at Keflavik as the action drew near, but the advantage appeared, at
least to the Russians, to be entirely in the favor of the attackers at
this point. The NATO defenders, however, had an ace up their sleeve that
the Soviet pilots, in their excitement, had failed to account for.

Post 3

The air defenses around Keflavik had remained silent as the aerial drama
closed to within 70 kilometers of the base, and a C-141 rumbled down the
runway, its crew hoping to escape before the coming drama unfolded. The
surviving F-15s, with the Su-33s pursuing, were making a straight line
for the runways, while remaining at thirty-six thousand feet. Then, as
the fight closed to within 40 kilometers of the airfield, MIM-104B PAC1
Patriot missiles exploded out of their boxy canisters east of Keflavik.
The deadly weapons streaked upwards at Mach 4.1.

Too late, many of the Russian pilots realized their peril. Adding to
their danger were the two Eagles which had just taken off, which added
their Sparrows to the mayhem unfolding in the Soviet formation. The
Patriot and Sparrow missiles combined to smash seven of the Soviet
fighters before the remaining six were able evade their way out of the
deadly kill zone of the Keflavik defenses, but not before one more Eagle
was destroyed by an R-27, the pilot ejecting directly over the base as
horrified family members looked on below. The loss ratio now, due to the
Soviets' blundering into range of the Keflavik SAM batteries, was four
F-15s to twelve Flankers.

As the surviving Russian pilots withdrew to regroup and circle over
central Iceland, two more F-15 pilots pushed their throttles forward and
rocketed down Keflavik's runway. The intervention of the SAMs had evened
the odds. Now six F-15s could venture out from the safety of Keflavik's
Patriot and HAWK launchers to go toe-to-toe with the six remaining
Sukois. The Americans, smarting from the quick loss of four of their
comrades, were out for blood, and their numerical parity now allowed
them to take advantage of the longer range of their Sparrow missiles.

The Soviet flyers were stunned by the loss of two thirds of their number
in their flight across the island. Their response to the new American
sortie was ragged. The Eagle pilots had spread out, with one flight
approaching the Russians from three different vectors. Missiles began to
leap off the rails of the opposing jets, American first, then the
shorter-ranged R-27s. Both sides' weapons performed poorly, but the
ability of the Americans to engage at long ranges proved decisive. The
Russians died or were forced to eject one by one, until the airspace
over Iceland was once again patrolled by NATO fighters only. One more
Eagle was lost in the battle as well.

For the loss of five precious F-15s, eighteen Sukois had been downed.
This represented a large portion of the air group on the Russian carrier
that was lurking to the north. The AWACS was tracking more Su-33s as
well as flights of Yak-141 Freestyles (indicating the presence of a
Kiev-class carrier group as well) patrolling north of the island,
obviously blocking any NATO planes from getting close enough to see what
the Soviets had up there. But they were not coming south, and the
Americans were happy to let them alone. Two Mig-23s out of the newly
captured field at Jan Mayen had tried to interfere in the end game of
the dogfight over central Iceland. One had been shot down, but the
presence of that airfield was another worrying portent.

Even worse, the NATO pilots were almost completely out of Sparrows now,
and the remainder of the squadron was still readying in their hardened
shelters at Keflavik. This, just as the ground-based radars scattered
along Iceland's coast began to pick up formations of bombers approaching
from the north, northwest, and west of the island.

Post 4

While the drama above had been unfolding, charter flights from the
outlying towns and villages around Iceland were converging on Reykjavik
like the spokes of a wheel, while MAC flights out of Keflavik and
airliners out of Reykjavik took off for Greenland and Bangor, Maine, as
fast as they could be filled with passengers. The Icelandic government
was not going to be caught with much of its most vulnerable population
in the crossfire of World War III. Some of the evacuees were leaving by
sea, however, borne by the Icelandic fishing fleet.

One of these ships, a commercial trawler out of the port of Akureyri at
the head of the Eyjafjordur on the north coast, was observed by the
radar on the ICG *Tyr* to reverse course halfway up the fjord and head
back towards Akureyri at twelve knots. The captain of the *Tyr*, knowing
that the boat should be evacuating civilians from the port, attempted to
reach the craft by radio to determine if there was an emergency. When he
got no response, he ordered his own vessel into the fjord to
investigate.

Moments later, the Tyr's captain received a frantic call from the
airfield mechanic on Grimsey Island, a speck of a landform off the north
coast of Iceland which contained a village of eighty-five inhabitants
(all evacuated save the mechanic), a small airfield, and not much else.
The mechanic breathlessly reported that three armed men in civilian
clothes were moving from building to building as if searching for
something. Then there was an explosion, and the line went dead.

The *Tyr*'s captain passed the report on to Reykjavik, unsure what to
make of this development but thankful that the population of Grimsey was
safely in Reykjavik. His cutter continued in pursuit of the southbound
fishing trawler, which still failed to answer his hails. He ordered his
helicopter, already aloft and doing a surface search at the fjord's
mouth, to enter the fjord and look over the small ship.

On the positive side of the ledger, the two MSIP F-15 Eagles sent from
the States to replace yesterday's losses in the missile attack had
landed, and the ground crews went to work frantically removing their
Sparrow armament and replacing those missiles with the far more capable
AMRAAMs. Provided they could be rearmed in time, these two birds would
supply a nasty surprise to another Soviet sweep. But the Soviet bomber
crews weren't willing to wait for the American fighter pilots to take
wing again. NATO radars began to detect small supersonic objects
detaching from three approaching bomber formations, heading towards
Iceland.

Post 5

As the supersonic Kh-22P missiles ignited under the wings of the
approaching Tu-16 and Tu-22 bombers, Keflavik began to prepare for
another round of the treatment the airfield had received yesterday.
However, the radar operators in the picket line around Iceland quickly
realized that the targets of these missiles were not the airfield
facilities, but rather the radar picket line itself.

The big Soviet radiation-seeking missiles streaked in from the north and
west. The first radar destroyed was the one covering the northwest
peninsula. Its crew had been too slow to shut their radar down, and the
technicians paid for their mistake with the destruction of their
powerful sensor. The crew of the radar on Iceland's northeast was able
to switch off their systems in time to confuse the Soviet weapons,
enough so that the Kh-22 fired at this site crashed into a snowy
hillside more than a mile beyond. Warned by the other attacks, the radar
crew on the southeast coast of the island shut down their sensor as
well, foiling the Soviet attack on that site.

The Soviets had suppressed the radar net, however. Two more formations
of Tu-22s, coming in behind the first two northern groups, now loosed
stand-off missiles of their own, this time aimed at Keflavik. The big
weapons lofted into a supersonic ballistic arc, headed south.

The technicians on the E-3 flying racetrack patterns to the southwest of
Keflavik tracked the inbound wave of missiles as they neared their
targets. As the Russian weapons closed within seventy kilometers PAC-1
missiles once again streaked out of the SAM battery's boxy launchers and
arced northward.

On the tarmac, airmen were scrambling to get the military families still
waiting to board a MAC flight into shelter before the missiles struck.
The Patriots almost prevented this from ever happening. The air defense
missiles did well, knocking down most of the incoming threats, but the
earlier engagement with the Soviet fighters had expended a large
proportion of the battery's ready missiles, and as the last PAC-1
container emptied it became clear that there would be leakers. The
shorter-ranged HAWK battery was poorly positioned to intercept any more.

Three missiles made it through the defenses. Two plowed into the end of
the runways and exploded, throwing snow, ice, dirt and concrete out of
two deep craters. That runway would be closed until those craters could
be repaired. The third missile plowed into a empty hardened aircraft
shelter, shredding the remaining equipment inside the structure but
otherwise doing no damage. The all clear began to sound around the base,
then abruptly ceased as another wave of missiles, launched by the second
group of Soviet bombers, was detected by the E-3's radar.

The control tower at Keflavik had been working to get every possible
aircraft off the ground at the start of the Soviet missile attack. This
resulted now in several F-15s orbiting over the base as tankers and MAC
flights rumbled down the one operational runway, took off, and banked to
head southwest. The Patriot battery had expended all of its ready
missiles and would be out of the fight until these could be replaced. As
such, the controllers on the AWACS ordered the Eagle pilots over
Keflavik to use their missiles to engage the incoming Russian weapons. A
pair of F-15 pilots had attempted to intercept the missiles of the first
wave mid-flight, but the Russian weapons had been too high and too fast
for an effective Sparrow engagement. All hoped that intercepting the
missiles at their destination would prove more fruitful.

The Russian missiles nosed down over Reykjavik and began their terminal
dive towards the NATO base. The American fighter jocks, circling at low
altitude south of the airfield, turned north and formed into a picket
line to engage the incoming threats. As the Russian missiles dove down
through 40,000 feet the Americans began to launch AIM-7s and then AIM-9
Sidewinders as the vampires drew closer. The Sparrows proved more
effective against the straight flying missiles than they had against the
maneuvering Soviet fighters, but even so the engagement window was very
small and two of the incoming Kh-22s got through. This had apparently
been intended to hit at the Keflavik munitions reserves, as both
missiles plowed into ammunition revetments and exploded. In each case,
the Russian weapon penetrated the frozen earth around the ammunition
facility but failed to penetrate the concrete inner shell. Base
firefighting teams rushed to both impact areas and extinguished the
fires before they could cause further damage. The cratered runway,
however, would take more time to repair. Above, the American fighters
turned north to intercept Russian bombers, which were following the
missiles in over northern Iceland.

Post 6

The US fighters flew north and northeast, low on missiles after their
defense of Keflavik. Two groups of Soviet bombers were approaching from
these vectors. One was set upon by a pair of Eagles whose pilots
performed a high-speed head-on approach, launching Sidewinders and then
20mm cannon rounds into the oncoming Tu-22Ms, sending four of the
supersonic jets trailing flame and smoke into the snowscape below. The
pilots of the northeast group of approaching bombers, realizing their
fighter screen had been destroyed, turned back, and accelerated out of
range before the Americans could close with them.

As the air battle lulled, more troubling signs began to arrive at the
Keflavik base HQ. With the ongoing attacks and damage to one of the
runways, the evacuation of military families and non-essential base
personnel would only be mostly complete by nightfall, though MAC flights
were again rumbling down the one operational runway, passing frantic
efforts to repair the craters in the other. In Reykjavik, the Icelandic
government reported that they would still have 35,000 civilians to
evacuate by the next day, despite a constant stream of charter flights
leaving the city's airport.

As if the situation wasn't complicated enough, with MAC and charter
flights leaving the island, small aircraft and helicopters bringing
evacuees to the capital from the rest of the island, international
flights still passing overhead, and intense air combat in the skies
throughout, now another message arrived at Keflavik HQ. Danish Air
Transport (DAT) flight 745 out of Copenhagen, which had been diverted
from its original destination in the Faroes due to a threat there, was
reporting an emergency and requesting permission to land at the
Hornafjordur airport on the south coast, near one of the NATO
surveillance radars. The Icelandic Coast Guard granted permission, and
the plane approached. Most of the F-15 pilots had been directed to
return to base to rearm, but one of the two remaining airborne teams was
vectored to escort the civilian aircraft in.

Minutes later, another troubling call came in from Bakkafjordur on the
east coast of the Island. Before being cut off, the caller had reported
a surfaced submarine in the harbor and several boats with armed men in
them making for the shore. At the same time, the Icelandic Coast Guard
called saying that they had received a cell phone call from aboard DAT
745 reporting that the aircraft had been hijacked and that the flight
crew were dead. In the confusion, the air controllers were forced to
decide if the aircraft, full of civilians as well as enemy combatants,
apparently, should be shot down by the escorting Eagles. In the end, the
commander at Keflavik elected to leave the aircraft alone until the
situation became clearer.

Then an official phoned again from Bakkasfjordur, reporting that armed
troops were taking control of the town, its port facilities, its
airport, and also that a group of the invaders had departed the village
in captured vehicles at high speed. Clearly the Soviets were making a
play to capture the Island's outstations. Their game became clearer in
the coming minutes.

Post 7

Over the next hour, the list of locations under attack by small groups
of *Spetznaz* and Naval infantry grew ever longer as the Soviets seized
one small airstrip after another along the north and west coasts of
Iceland. DAT 745 landed and immediately disgorged five men armed with
AK-47s and explosives who took control of the tower at Hornafjordur. In
Reykjavik the telephone exchange and broadcasting station came under
attack by teams of Soviet special forces. The base commander at Keflavik
dispatched a platoon of Marines to assist the Icelanders in the fight
taking place in the streets of their capital. The suspicious fishing
trawler that that had reversed course in the Eyafjordur entered the
harbor at Akureyri and uniformed Soviet naval infantry began unloading
boats.

The ICG *Tyr* was still too distant to interfere, more than halfway up
the fjord, but its embarked helicopter came close for a look at the
ongoings. As the aircraft completed its second circle of the site,
reporting on naval infantry climbing down into the boats, a team of two
soldiers dashed out of the trawler's superstructure carrying a long
tube. One soldier knelt, oriented his weapon upwards, and launched an
SA-7 SAM at the coast guard bird. The Icelandic crew never had a chance.
The shoulder-launched missile exploded feet from the craft, spewing hot
shrapnel that shredded the small helicopter, which dropped burning into
the dark icy water below. Nearby, the Soviet assault force sped towards
the Akureyri port facility in their high speed RHIBs.

Closer to Keflavik, the Rockville radar station at the point of the
Keflavik peninsula came under mortar fire. Another of the airbase's
defense platoons was dispatched to sweep the area west of the airfield.
They blundered into a Spetznaz unit shifting their mortars from one
target to another and a fierce firefight ensued. The American security
force was able to pin down the Russians, but the rest of the airfield's
defensive force had to converge on the threat before the last Soviet
commando was killed.

In quick succession, the towns of Hofn, Vopnafjordur, Husavik (with a
1600m runway), and Sauderkrokur all reported approaching small teams of
armed men before going off the air. And more ominous signs were
developing in the skies northeast of Iceland. Two more bomber formations
were approaching, as well as several pairs of slow moving contacts from
out of Jan Mayen that could only be transports. The ground crews at
Keflavik had managed to rearm several F-15s, and the pilots of these
jets now taxied back on to the one available runway, punched their
afterburners and rocketed upwards to once again defend the Icelandic
sky.

The ICG *Tyr* finally arrived at Akureyri harbor. Enraged by the loss of
his helicopter and its crew, the captain of the cutter ordered his
machineguns and 76mm cannon to engage the trawler and the RHIBs. Shot
peppered the fishing boat, shredding the superstructure, and machinegun
fire destroyed two of the four RHIBs. But the Tyr was not a warship, and
ammunition began to run low rather quickly. That fact, and some
ineffective RPG return fire from the Russians ashore, convinced the
captain to withdraw back up the fjord.

Anticipating another missile attack, the air controllers on the AWACS
opted to keep the airborne F-15s orbiting at low altitude directly over
Keflavik. The Patriot battery only had six missiles remaining. These
were now all loaded onto the launchers, but wouldn't be enough to defeat
another wave of the supersonic Kh-22s, and the HAWK battery had yet to
successfully intercept a single missile. The Americans lacked the
numbers to both protect the base adequately and venture out to intercept
the approaching pairs of light transports from Jan Mayen. Indeed, the
crew aboard the E-3 watched their scopes helplessly as a Yak-141 flew
over northeast Iceland and destroyed the radar site that had managed to
evade the longer ranged ARMs launched by the first wave of bombers.

As the situation was developing, a Flash message came in from US 2nd
Fleet HQ. The Admiral had been monitoring the ongoing battle on Iceland
and elsewhere. Prompted by the attrition among the F-15s as well as the
Soviet occupation of many of the communities on the north and west sides
of the Island, the message ordered the commander of Keflavik to
immediately begin evacuating the base and destroying its stores and
infrastructure. A major Soviet airborne assault on the island was
expected within the next several hours, and the Admiral did not believe
NATO had the strength to hold.

As such, TG 84.1 would pull off its ASW patrol in the Denmark straight
and proceed to the Keflavik peninsula to provide air defense for the
evacuation. The LPD USS *Trenton*, transiting south of Iceland, would
change course and steam north to take on the base's helicopters. Darkly,
the Icelandic government would not be informed of the evacuation until
it was nearly complete. The base commander finished reading the order as
klaxons sounded once again. The incoming Soviet bombers had released
another wave to Kh-22s...

Post 8

The Russian missiles came on as before, lofting into supersonic arcs
that nosed over to dive onto the remaining operational runway at
Keflavik. If this strip were sufficiently cratered it would trap a large
number of aircraft, tankers, a priceless E-3, the remaining MAC C-5s and
C-141s, several Air Force and Coast Guard C-130s, a pair of P-3s, and
the remaining F-15s on the runway. The crews of all of these were
frantically preparing their aircraft for the evacuation, but it would
all be for naught if the Russian missiles got through.

As the Soviet weapons closed, the remaining six PAC-1s rocketed from
their launchers, destroying half of the inbounds. Now it was the Eagle
jocks' turn. They banked their fighters north, lit off their radars, and
launched AIM-7s and AIM-120s from the MSIP birds that had finally gotten
off the ground at the incoming missiles. All the Kh-22s were downed but
one by the radar-homing missiles. This last one dove at the Keflavik
runway. Just as it was tipping over into its terminal maneuver, an AIM-9
from one of the F-15s exploded above it, dropping wreckage of both
missiles onto the base perimeter fence. The missile attack had been
defeated, but once again the airborne American fighters were low on
missiles.

The AWACS controllers vectored the four best-armed F-15 pilots to
intercept the small transports that were approaching the airports at
Akureyri and Hofnafjordur. Other transports were already landing at some
of the more distant towns that had been seized, but these were beyond
the capabilities of the American pilots to intercept at this point.

Over Akureyri, four Mig-23s out of Jan Mayen attempted to interfere with
the American intercept. Two fell to the American's remaining Sparrow
missiles while the other two engaged in a brief dogfight with one of the
Eagle pilots before withdrawing. The other American swooped down on the
hapless An-24 light transports. Sidewinder missiles connected with both
aircraft, in each case exploding against one of the engines and causing
the thin wing to fold. Both An-24s, along with their crews and a platoon
of elite Soviet paratroopers, plunged into the snowfields south of
Akureyri and exploded.

At Hofnafjordur, the intercept was less successful. A raid of Tu-22Ms
was inbound on the same vector as the transports, and the NATO fighter
pilots had to choose between engaging these and going after the
transports. They chose to protect Keflavik, as holding Iceland was a
lost cause now, the mission being to get as much out as possible. The
Eagles tore into the bombers head on, downing several in a single pass.
The others turned and fled, leaving the Eagle drivers free to attack the
transports inbound to Hornafjordur. But it was not to be. The
distraction of the bomber raid had been just enough to allow the Soviet
transport pilots to advance their throttles and make a fast descent into
the small airfield. Both turboprops made safe landings, harder than
their occupants would have liked, and taxied to the tower.

Before the planes even stopped the doors opened and Russian *desantniki*
began dropping onto the tarmac below. They linked up with the KGB
officers from the DAT flight who provided them with seized vehicles, and
a squad immediately took off for the nearby surveillance radar, which
even now was being destroyed by its NATO crew.

Other Soviet *desant* platoons put down all over the northwest arc of
Iceland on captured airstrips with less drama than these two locations.
The Americans were simply spread too thin defending and evacuating
Keflavik to interfere. The Admiral's judgment on NATO's ability to hold
the island was looking ever more accurate as time went on. The numbers
of invaders were relatively small, but there was nothing to oppose them.
In Reykjavik, the attackers at the telephone exchange and TV station had
withdrawn when the USMC platoon arrived, but the American platoon leader
could not exploit his success, being ordered without explanation to
return to base. The Icelanders watched them Americans leave in growing
confusion and concern.

South and west of Iceland, the P-3s from Keflavik began dropping
sonobuoys to sanitize a path for TG 84.1 and the USS Trenton, escorted
by the cruiser USS Vella Gulf to approach the southwest peninsula. Two
Soviet subs, an Alfa and a Sierra, were detected transiting the Denmark
straight in TF 84.1's wake, but the Orion crews didn't have enough fuel
to both protect the NATO ships and prosecute the contacts and still make
the long flight to Bangor, Maine. These Russians would make it into the
Atlantic. Keflavik commander, who was keeping his Gulfstream as the last
to depart the base, hoped to inflict at least some damage on the
anticipated Russian paratroop drop. He ordered all of his fighters back
to base to rearm in the hope of having a sizable force to put into the
air when the time came.

Post 9

The Soviet planners had not intended to give the Americans time to
concentrate their fighters against the massed transports carrying a
regiment of the 76th Guards Airborne Division to Iceland. Shortly after
the last Eagle pilot landed his fighter on Keflavik's open runway
troubling signs began to appear on the screens watched by the
technicians in the AWACS. Electronic jamming began to fill their scopes
covering the eastern edge of Iceland. The monitors deciphered the unique
signatures of at least two of the potent An-12 EW aircraft that had been
causing NATO fliers in Norway so much trouble. Through the jamming haze
they could also make out the signatures of powerful radars mounted on
multiple Mig-31 interceptors. NATO pilots had learned to respect these
aircraft and their long-ranged R-40 (AA-6) missiles.

While the situation to the east of Iceland was developing, the base
personnel at Keflavik did their best to get every person possible off
the island. The remaining military family members were crammed aboard
the last few MAC transports without regard to comfort or even safety.
Once these aircraft were gone, the remainder of the base's personnel
began to board the KC-135s, the remaining E-3, a P-3, and SAR C-130s
that departed the base as quickly as they could be readied. Three C-130s
were reserved for the base defense personnel who, having eliminated the
*Spetznaz* threat to the west, were now busy destroying as much
equipment as possible to prevent its capture by the Russians, and the
ground crews who were preparing the surviving F-15s for one more mission
from Keflavik before they made the long flight to Goose Bay, Canada.
Tankers from the US would meet them over Greenland to refuel *en route*.

Even before any Soviet transports began to appear on the scopes of the
NATO radar operators, events conspired to weaken the blow they would be
able to land against the paradrop. Two Soviet reconnaissance Tu-16
bombers were working their way around Iceland, one to the northwest and
another to the southeast. The northeast Russian was coming dangerously
close to detecting the Trenton/Vella Gulf group to the south. The loss
of these ships would mean that the helicopters still at Keflavik would
have to be burned rather than rescued. To counter the threat, two ready
F-15s at the base rolled down the runway and rotated up before banking
and settling into a southerly intercept course.

The Russian snooper was descending, apparently to visually identify the
two NATO ships in the gathering darkness, when the lead American pilot
switched on his radar and launched a single long-ranged Sparrow missile
at the twin-engine bomber. The Russians knew they were under attack
based on the warbling of their radar warning receiver, but the pilot was
unable to locate the incoming missile. The weapon exploded into the
Badger at the midpoint of the fuselage. The aircraft continued for a few
seconds, then violently folded in half, the pieces falling towards the
clouds and dark ocean below.

The Americans now turned their attention towards the second snooper
flying south of Iceland. The crew of this one, warned by a distress call
from the pilot of the doomed Tu-16, turned back. The Americans,
approaching the point where they would not have enough fuel to
rendezvous with the tankers, were ordered by their controllers to turn
away as well to start the long flight to North America. The Russians had
lost a valuable reconnaissance platform and been denied information
about NATO ships near Iceland, but the force available to confront the
Soviet airborne drop was now reduced by two airframes.

As the skeleton ground crews at Keflavik labored in their hardened
shelters to ready the remaining F-15s for one more mission, a large
screen of lumbering transports began to appear on the eastern edge of
the circling E-3's radar coverage despite the An-12s distant jamming. A
full squadron of Mig-31s was also off the coast, interposed between the
transports and the American force at Keflavik. The air commander ordered
all of his ready jets, six F-15s, to take off and prepare to intercept
the Soviets. How they would get past a squadron of eighteen potent
Mig-31s to do it, though, was a problem none of them were sure they
could overcome.

Post 10

The six American pilots formed up over Keflavik. The airbase was now
protected within the edge of the engagement envelope for the SM-2
missiles carried by USS *John Rogers*, the *Spruance*-class flagship of
TG 84.1. At the base, the US Army Patriot and USMC HAWK crews had
already destroyed their equipment to the best of their ability and made
their way to the airfield, hoping for a flight off of the doomed island.
Four helicopters at the base lifted off, heading for the approaching USS
Trenton to the south carrying as many people as each bird could lift.
High above, the last F-15 pilot leveled his aircraft off at thirty-six
thousand feet and the entire force turned east and accelerated.

The American's plan for interfering in the air drop was both simple and
desperate. Four of the Eagles would cross central Iceland, making
directly for the masses of Soviet aircraft to the east. The two
remaining pilots would drop down to low altitude, turn south, and try to
use the rugged Icelandic coast to get in behind the Russian interceptor
screen. Four Eagles would have to face the weight of eighteen Mig-31s,
and even if they succeeded the two raiders to the south would only be
able to disrupt and put a dent into the Soviet drop, rather than stop it
outright. But they had to try.

As the American approached, the Russian Mig pilots formed their aircraft
into a rough line abreast and pushed their throttles to the max. The
Mig-31 was not a maneuverable aircraft, but what lacked in agility it
made up for in speed. The big Russian fighters leapt forward,
accelerating to nearly Mach 2 as they closed with the oncoming
Americans, their powerful radars tracking on the four lonely blips.

The opposing airmen closed with each other rapidly. At extreme range,
the four American each selected a target from the multitude on their own
scopes and launched two AIM-7s at each. Night had fallen, and shortly
after their own missiles had streaked away the American fighter jocks
could make out the winking of the wave of return fire leaping off the
rails of the line of Russian jets in the darkness ahead. More than a
dozen big R-40 missiles arced towards the American jets. The Eagle
pilots, RWR warbles screaming in their helmets, gritted their teeth and
kept their radars pointed at their targets, willing the outbound
missiles to hurry so they could finally evade.

The American missiles exploded into the Russian formation with
disappointing results. The extreme range, high speed of the targets, and
jamming support provided by the An-12s combined to keep Russian losses
to two Mig-31s. Fortunately for the Americans, each of the pilots killed
had been directing a pair of the incoming missiles. These now lost lock
and flew on harmlessly. The four American pilots now threw their jets
into violent evasive maneuvers, trying to outmaneuver the big Russian
weapons locked on to them. One didn't make it. An AA-6 exploded into the
belly of a banking F-15, destroying both engines and causing the fighter
to rapidly break up.

The surviving three Americans turned west and flipped on their
afterburners, trying to escape from the oncoming wall of Migs. Now the
Russian speed advantage told, as the Soviet pilots were able to close
with the retreating Americans and launch a second volley of missiles.
The engagement profile wasn't ideal, but one more Eagle was destroyed
before the Russians turned back over central Iceland. Their run on
afterburner had depleted their fuel, and several jets would have to take
on gas from the tankers circling off the coast.

Post 11

The front of the stream of Soviet Il-76 transports carrying a regiment
of the elite 76th Guards Airborne Division was now making landfall over
the east coast of Iceland. The formation was composed of more than two
dozen of the big, four-engine jets, and they were heavily laden with
paratroopers, BMD assault vehicles, mortars, artillery, and pallets of
supplies. The drop zone the Soviet planners had selected was a broad,
treeless plain on the southern coast of the island. The location had the
advantage of being astride the Icelandic Highway 1, the road that
circled the perimeter of the island. Best of all, it was completely
undefended, as was most of the rest of the island at this point.

The pilots of the wide-bodied transports banked right and began to
descend to low altitude for their final approach. A *Spetznaz*
pathfinder team from the Hofn landing had set up beacons to guide them
into the DZ. This was the point when the transports were at their most
vulnerable. Flying low and slow, their paratroop doors open, cargo ramps
down, paratroopers standing in long lines to jump, the big jets could
not maneuver or evade at this point.

The other two American pilots had been working their way east along the
south coast of Iceland at low altitude. When the Soviets had started
their sweep over central Iceland, these two turned north, trying to turn
the flank of the Russian formation and get in among the exposed
transports. Almost immediately their ambush began to unravel. Six of the
Soviet Mig-31 pilots had held back from engaging the Americans to the
east. They now detected to two ascending Americans to the south and
turned towards the threat, pushing their throttles forward to
afterburner.

The Americans had no choice but to try to deal with this threat. AIM-7s
leapt off the rails of the two fighters, streaking north towards the
oncoming Russians. But now the American plan truly unraveled. Several of
the Migs that had turned back the F-15s over central Iceland now
vectored towards the new incursion, approaching the isolated Americans
from the northwest and firing their own R-40s at extreme range.

The two Americans had no choice but to dive for the deck, bank, and
evade the multiple incoming threats, leaving their Sparrows to fly off
into nowhere in the process. The maneuver failed for one of them. A
Russian missile exploded into his aircraft's tail just as he was
leveling off several hundred feet above the water, knocking the
twin-engined fighter and its pilot into the dark ocean below. His
wingman escaped by flying far out over the north Atlantic before turning
back west. The Russians, knowing they had defeated the only credible
threat to the airborne troops, were happy to let him go, returning to
their barrier patrol over Iceland.

The Il-76s proceeded unmolested over the drop zone, where thousands of
paratroopers jumped into the dark night, forming long lines of gently
descending parachutes. Vehicles and artillery, yanked out of the back of
the transports by drogue chutes, descended under three massive chutes
each. When these fully crewed vehicles neared the ground, retro-rockets
on their drop pallets fired to soften the landing. Minutes after
landing, Russian BMD assault vehicles and light trucks rolled off the
pallets and moved to where the troopers were assembling. Within thirty
minutes columns were moving away from the drop zone in both directions
along Highway 1. The drop had been a complete success, the American
attempt to interfere a disaster.

Back at Keflavik, the US commander knew now that the security of his
base was measured in hours, the amount of time it would take the
Russians to move to the southwest peninsula. He ordered every remaining
aircraft into the air. The remaining personnel were moved to nearby
fishing villages where locals were persuaded to take them onto fishing
trawlers that would try to rendezvous with the NATO ships offshore. An
American submarine had located the *Kuznetsov* battle group heading
south at 18 kts, meaning that TG 84.1 had precious little time to stick
around and pick up evacuees before they would have to flee south.

As the three Eagle pilots who had survived the thrust at the Soviet
transports overflew the base, the remainder of the squadron took off in
pairs. They all headed west to link up with tankers circling over the
southern tip of Greenland to help them on their way to North America.
Next the last three C-130s, carrying the personnel deemed least
replaceable took off, and finally the base commander walked up the steps
to his Gulfstream, entered without looking around, and ordered the pilot
to take off. He had managed to get all of his aircraft out, but it was
hard for him not to feel he had failed in his mission. With the
departure of his jet, the last military presence for NATO left Iceland,
which in a few short hours would be completely under the control of the
forces of the Soviet Union.
