**Northern Fury 9 - Hold the Line!**

17 Feb 1994, 0800 Zulu, 0600 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf9\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.16319in" alt="USS Enterprise CVN-65 Aircraft Carrier US Navy" />

**<u>You are the commander of the USS *Enterprise* CVBG, (CVN-65)</u>**.
Due to heightened tensions, your refit/re-fueling was rushed through and
completed 8 months ahead of schedule. On the 12<sup>th</sup> of Feb,
while completing your workup trials off of Puerto Rico, you were sent a
FLASH message to precede north at best possible speed. In your Task
Group are the USS *Anzio* CG 68, a brand-new Ticonderoga class cruiser,
another Tico, CG 63 *Cowpens* and the venerable Leahy class cruiser
CG-17 *Yarnell*. Adding potency to the escort, two refurbished Spruance
class DD’s, the *Thorne* and *O’Bannon* have just completed workups,
both with the new Vertical Launch System (VLS) providing a very robust
missile capability. Two FFG’s the *Curts* and *Simpson* round out the
TG. Your air group is Carrier Air Wing 6, and it’s a bit of a mixed bag,
you have some of the oldest aircraft in the fleet (A6-E’s) and 6 of the
very newest F/A-18C capable of using the AIM-120 AMRAAM missiles, which
proved very effective during a training run through.

The journey north was full of news, as the war developed your training
became very serious. At dawn on the 15<sup>th</sup> as the TG passed
Bermuda it went into a Communications Lockdown and later that day met up
with a replenishment group. By dawn yesterday you were topped up with
all the supplies and ammunition needed. AOE 3 *Seattle* remained with
the TG, although its slower speed is a hindrance you cannot afford the
escorts to break her away, she needs to be handy for emergency
re-supply.

Just before midnight last night you received a warning order from
CINCLANT informing you of some late developments – including the fall of
Iceland. Your orders were to position the TG northeast of Newfoundland
and prepare for heavy engagement, several land based squadrons were
placed under your Operational Control and at 0200 this morning you held
a communications check with 5 submarines that are being coordinated by
you.

A few minutes ago, you were called to your communications room to
receive orders.

Good Shooting and Godspeed Admiral!

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf9\image2.jpeg" style="width:5.92708in;height:3.94753in" alt="RUSSIA TO UPGRADE TU-22M3 STRATEGIC BOMBERS IN 2018 - DCSS News" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#9</u>** every campaign has a turning point, if all
goes well this scenario should be that point for NATO. The pre-war plan
was never to put a single carrier up against the Soviet onslaught, but
realities have forced the hand of Commander 2<sup>nd</sup> US Fleet, and
until forces can assemble – the Big-E (USS Enterprise) is all that is
available.

Prepare for a fight.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf9\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.32639in" alt="Ticonderoga Class Guided Missile Cruiser United States US Navy CG 47 cruiser Bunker hill Mobile Bay Antietam Normandy Leyte Gulf San Jacinto Lake Champlain Philippine Sea Anzio Shiloh datasheet pictures photos video" />
