**<u>Mediterranean Fury \#1 â€“ Road to Byzantium</u>**

**<u>AAR by maverick3320, May 2021</u>**

Bottom line up front: this scenario is epic. I don't mean epic in the
way people use it lately, as in "cool" or "awesome", I mean epic as an
adjective. Altogether I think I've put about sixty hours into this
scenario alone, including probably 6-8 hours just in planning; overall,
it's been quite the experience, but I've reached a point of frustration
(15 hours of game time left in the scenario) to where I'm not sure I
really want to spend anymore time on it.

This scenario is played from the Warsaw Pact perspective and the
objective is to seize the Bosphorus. It's basically the first two days
of a theater level campaign, managing hundreds of /assets, mostly Russian
but quite a few Romanian and Bulgarian forces as well. The unique, at
least to me, part of the scenario is the option to choose some political
actions that happen in the background while the war is being fought.
There are two sets of choices: first, the ability to degrade one of
Turkey's military branches (air force, army, or navy) to presumably keep
some forces air, naval, or ground forces, respectively, out of the
fight, or try and separate Greece from Turkey and keep them out of the
fight. Second, the player chooses one of three options into how many
victory points the player wants to invest up front to increase the
success chances of (presumably) other political actions in the
background.

Intel was as follows: Turkey would probably fight, Greece was a wild
card, an "aggressor" squadron at Incirlik. The Americans were in the
Med, but too far away to really do anything and tied down with numerous
Soviet forces there.

I chose to A) try and keep Greece out of the war, and B) invest 400
victory points (the middle choice) to moderately increase the chances of
other political successes behind the scenes while I was fighting.
Unfortunately neither choice seemed to have any effect. Greece deployed
a decent amount of naval /assets, sent numerous air strikes at my forces,
and eventually apparently started running CAPs over Turkish territory
(?) as I frequently saw Greek aircraft attacking my forces from the east
(!) side of the Bosphorus. I did get multiple messages saying that my
political actions were working and that the military forces and
government were in disarray, however, it didn't seem to have any effect;
Turkey was running 4-6 plane CAPs over all their airbases and also sent
numerous strikes at my forces. I also received a message that rebel
forces were engaging Turkish forces (or something like that), but I
never saw anything happen, and the rebels don't have any losses or
expenditures below.

One of the scenario notes is that, although WP has a lot of /assets, no
AEW /assets apparently could be spared, and missile stocks were somehow
in very short supply. Odd that the WP would start a war with low missile
stocks and not a single Mainstay in an entire theater, but I guess you
go to war with what you have (to paraphrase Rumsfeld), even if you are
the one starting it. The player has a large amount of
Backfires/Blinders/Badgers, but only 20 or so anti surface missiles
(AS-4 Kitchen mod B). Having played other scenarios as the WP, I knew
how dangerous F-16s can be (even armed with nothing but sidewinders) so
I determined to try and knock out one of the main Turkish F-16 bases. I
started off the war by plastering Murted AB with the 20 AS-4s, delighted
that 16 or so hit the runways, approximately eight on each. About an
hour later I watched F-16s take off at will from the base - apparently
even though both runways showed BDA as red and "heavy damage", F-16s
continued to take off. Frustrating. So I restarted and instead of going
for an airfield strike targeted basically every radar in range of my air
to start the scenario (since the AS-4 kitchens seemed to be the only
missiles that enemy air couldn't shoot down), along with the closest
naval base. This plan was much more successful, killing five 209 subs
(another big worry of mine, since Soviet ASW isn't the greatest) and
knocking out 8-9 radars. Yet this also turned out to be somewhat of a
pointless strategy, as several hours later at least two NATO AWACs were
airborne at all times over Turkish territory.

I also set up three CAP zones, West (over Romanian territory), Central
(directly north of the Bosphorus), and East (over the center of the
Black sea). West CAP had Romanian/Bulgarian Mig-29s, Mig-21s, and
Mig-23s. Central CAP had Russian Su-15s, Mig-25s and Mig-29s from
Sevastopol, and since I wasn't expecting much action in the east, that
CAP had only two pair of Mig-23s from Kirovsk on station. Generally the
CAPs seemed to work well, at least up to the point when I stopped
playing the scenario, or up to the point when the enemy would send an
alpha strike, of which there were three: one composed of 20 or so
Turkish F4 phantom IIs, one composed of an equal number F5s, and the
knockout blow from the Americans (more on this one later). Greece also
sent several semi-alpha strikes of 10-15 A-7s at once as well, and one
smaller one of F-104s.

Naval forces I generally re-routed from their pre-planned paths, as from
previous scenario experience subs just seem to love and hide along those
paths. I sent all my amphibious /assets to land on the west side of the
Bosphorus, along with all of my airborne /assets. I didn't want to attack
both sides of the Bosphorus at once and figured I could provide better
air cover on the West side. Overall, my land strategy seemed to work
well; by the time I left the scenario I had cleared all the enemy land
forces from the west to Sakarya in the east. One note is that enemy
artillery was very effective and was responsible for about 90% of the
losses my land forces suffered. I understand that the game isn't
designed around ground warfare but it seemed like enemy artillery could
pinpoint my land forces even in the forested areas and really didn't
ever miss. Enemy artillery would routinely destroy my mech forces while
my artillery struggled to damage infantry and other enemy forces and
never seemed to run out of ammo. Perhaps the NATO M109s are just better?
Also, a large portion of my ground /assets were "landed detachment" units
that had no weapons (?). I wasn't sure what I was supposed to do with
them, so I drove all of them up to Romania and left them there.

My surface naval forces worked their way to the Bosphorus with no
losses; I figured the SAG centered on Slava would help provide air
defense for the landing, while the other various ships would provide
gunfire along the coast line. The strategy didn't really work. Of the 30
or so SAMs fired by the Slava group I think only a few ended up hitting
aircraft, which seemed to be a common theme in the scenario. My three
SA-5 gammon sites in the west that I thought would provide a decent air
defense net didn't hit a single enemy aircraft the entire scenario. Not
one. The only effective land SAM that I had was the Gecko Mod 1, which I
think actually took out three enemy aircraft. The gunfire support
strategy didn't really work, either. Regardless of the ship, type of
ammo, or target, I rarely damaged enemy surface forces with the ship's
57mm/76mm/100mm gunfire. I probably shot at least near 1500 rounds but
only hit a few targets.

My strategy seemed to work well, at least up until the end. I had killed
57 Turkish F16s, along with 9 Greek F-16s and 70 Phantom IIs; as best I
can tell I had wiped out the bulk of the Turkish naval and ground forces
as well. What finally did me in was the Americans. I suspected the
Americans would eventually make an appearance (not including the TLAM
strike on several of my airbases out of the blue), as it would be hard
for any scenario designer to leave them out, right? What I didn't
realize was the scope. With around 17 hours left in the scenario my
ELINT picks up five Jammer aircraft heading toward the bosphorus. Then
four F-14 Tomcats show up, and start throwing AIM-54s everywhere around
Romania, scattering my ELINT and CAP. Not a huge deal, but certainly got
the heart rate going. I sent up additional air /assets, knowing that
jammers probably weren't sent out for no reason, and then a short while
later I detect 24 bogeys in groups of four. My CAP at this point is
around 20 aircraft; unfortunately, only eight of those were Mig-29s. I
should point out that at this point in the scenario I'm down to about 20
total Alamo missiles on my Mig-29s, not that they were a huge asset
anyway - I think only about 10% of those fired actually hit. The bigger
problem was at this point several of my Mig-29 bases were also running
out of AA-11 archers, which really was the only effective AAM any of my
aircraft carried. I started basing Mig-29s all over the theater to try
and keep them reloaded with Archers, which meant longer transit times to
the CAP. I would be remiss if I didn't mention the complete - and I mean
complete - worthlessness of the Mig-21/Atoll AAM combo, which was
probably about 25% of my air forces. Not a single enemy plane was hit by
an Atoll; in fact, it was rare for the Mig-21s to even be able to fire
one, even from a few miles away and directly behind an enemy aircraft on
a straight course. Mig-29s were fairly effective, but in a straight up
fight against F-16s I learned early on that they lose every time, so I
never fought F-16s on fair terms and tried to use my Mig-21s as meat
shields (somewhat effectively). Mig-23s were mostly ineffective, as
well. Mig-29s probably had 75% of my kills, followed by the Mig-25/Acrid
combo with another 15%.

So my CAP engages the US alpha strike, but of course eight more Tomcats
show up, along with several Greek Mig 2000s, Greek F16s, and just to
throw salt in the wound, four F4 Phantoms strike in the east at the same
time. It was a slaughter; the strike was composed of F-18s and I lost
basically every aircraft I had. The US carrier in the Med just threw
basically the bulk of it's air wing at me. Seems like a curious decision
for the Americans, as I thought they were tied down with Soviet forces
in the Med and too far away to make a difference....guess not. Off with
the intel guys' heads. Quite frustrating, as I really had no way to deal
with it. I lit up my SA-5 gammons to try and assist my CAP, but as
mentioned before, every SA-5 fired missed.

To sum up the Warsaw Pact frustrations:

> 1\) Awful SAMs
>
> 2\) Mostly useless AAMs (with the exception of the Archers)
>
> 3\) Mostly useless naval gunfire support
>
> 4\) No AWACs
>
> 5\) Extremely limited ASMs and AAMs
>
> 6\) Horrible intel
>
> 7\) Mostly useless political actions
>
> 8\) End up fighting Turkey, Greece, and the US

I did have a lot of fun playing this scenario, at least up until the
American strike. Credit has to go to Gunner98 as I'm sure it took a ton
of time to put this together. It just got a bit frustrating when Greece
didn't stay out, Turkey wasn't affected, the Americans came in force,
and the WP air, missiles, and SAMs were so ineffective. It seemed like
every major event/decision in the scenario worked against WP - perhaps
that is by design. If anyone has any tips on how they successfully
completed this scenario I would love to read about it.
