**USN Submarines**

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/subs/image1.jpg)

US submarines deploy globally on a myriad of tasks, running silent and
deep. Whatever they are asked to do they are very capable sensor
platforms and a potent weapons platform should it come to war. A
submarine’s greatest strength is its stealth, in peacetime or in war,
the ability to be somewhere and do something without being detected.
When at peace, a submarine is constantly monitoring its surroundings,
gathering electronic and acoustic intelligence, posing a hidden threat
and training for any eventuality. At war in addition to everything else,
the submarine is the silent hunter, the knife in the dark that can cut
out key targets and escape.

With the exception of the unarmed research vessel *USS Dolphin*, the
entire fleet of [US
submarines](http://www.rickcampbellauthor.com/styled/index.html) is
nuclear powered, the last diesel-electric boat (SSK), *USS Blueback
SS-581*, was retired in 1990. The navy operates two main types; the
Attack Submarine designated an SSN, and those designed to carry
ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads, designated SSBN and often
called ‘Boomers’. Nuclear powered submarines have many advantages,
extended periods at sea constantly submerged, high sustained speed, size
and unlimited electric power for sensors and other equipment, but they
are inherently noisier than a conventionally powered boat running on
batteries alone. Nuclear boats are also very expensive to build and
operate, few nations can afford them. Tactically, an SSN is at a
disadvantage only in restricted and shallow water where an SSK
(diesel-electric powered Hunter-Killer) can operate quieter and maneuver
better due to its small size. Everywhere else, an SSNs speed can be used
to outmaneuver surface foes that are hunting it, and its more prolific
sensors and weapons can be used to great effect.

The US Navy maintains a fleet of 24 SSBNs, 97 SSNs and 12 Special
Mission SSNs, these are SSNs with a specialized role. Second only in
size to the USSR, which maintains roughly twice as many, what the US
lacks in numbers however they gain in technology, only the very latest
generation of Soviet submarine can challenge the bulk of the US fleet in
capability.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/subs/image2.jpeg)

On a rough scale of capacity to survive confrontation, the oldest boats
in the US inventory, the Permit class should compare favorably to Soviet
1<sup>st</sup> and some 2<sup>nd</sup> Generation boats, although the
Victor III would put the Permit boats at a severe disadvantage. The
Sturgeon class should be a match for the Victor IIIs but will not
survive long against 3<sup>rd</sup> or 4<sup>th</sup> generation such as
the Sierra or Akula classes. The 688 class Los Angeles boats are far
more capable than any 2<sup>nd</sup> generation or older, and a match
for the Sierra class 3<sup>rd</sup> generation boats. The Soviet Alpha
class and 4<sup>th</sup> Generation Akula will prove difficult for the
early Los Angeles class boats however, but the 688I and certainly the
Seawolf will be able to deal with them.

The job of an SSBN is to remain undetected and ready, as part of the
national deterrence force to launch its missiles. If an SSBN is detected
it has failed in its main task, the best option is to disengage and
escape to hide some more. The Ohio class SSBNs are world class, operate
independent of any other element and remain at sea for a significant
period of their lifespan.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/subs/image3.jpg)
