**Northern Fury 4 AAR**

**By Joel Radunzel**

**First Post:**

This scenario takes place starting at 1300 on the second day of WWIII,
14 February 1994. See my other two AARs for some of the back story and
the events that occurred around the North Cape on the first day. Bottom
line, the Soviets have established air superiority over northern Norway
and the Red Banner Northern Fleet, including two Kuznetsov-class CVs,
two Kirov-class battlecruisers, two Kiev-class carriers, and a strong
amphibious group have broken out into the Norwegian Sea, destination
unknown (for the sake of the storyline, I don’t think the subs on X-Ray
station were supposed to have sunk any of the Russian capital ships, so
for this story I’m pretending that that didn’t happen). Keflavik on
Iceland was hit and put out of action by a massive submarine-launched
missile attack.

The Norwegian-owned volcanic island of Jan Mayen lies north of the
arctic circle in the Norwegian Sea between Greenland, Iceland, and
Norway. It boasts a population of 18 who are outnumbered two to one by
the platoon of Norwegian signal troops who man and operate the radar and
tracking array there. On the first day of the war the Norwegian Minister
of Defense (recall the King and Prime Minister were killed in a
terrorist attack yesterday) ordered a C-130 to fly to Jan Mayen and
deliver a small group of ground crewmen who would operate four F-5A
Freedom Fighters and a P-3 Orion who also arrived at the island’s
airfield, Jan Mayensfeld. If the Russians choose to occupy the island,
there is really nothing NATO can do about it at this point. Regardless,
the Russians are unlikely to waste amphibious resources on the rock, so
any invasion will almost certainly be airborne. To this end, the C-130
also delivered three teams of RBS-70 MANPADS, and a capable Norwegian
Army major by the name of Nansen to coordinate the island’s defenses.
The hope is that the small detachment of fighters and SAMS should come
as a nasty surprise to any Russian intruders expecting the island to be
abandoned.

Jan Mayen does serve one important purpose for NATO, however. If the
Russians come, it will be clear evidence that they intend to try to
invade Iceland. Intel indicates that the Soviet’s Kiev battle group is
nearby. Unknown to Major Nansen, an American submarine, the USS
Jacksonville (SSN 699, captained by Commander Dickel) has been
dispatched to intercept this group, and the Norwegian Kobben-class
diesel boat Sklinna (Kaptein Bulls) is patrolling of Jan Mayen’s
southeast coast. The signal platoon is at the radar facility, and the
three RBS-70 teams are spread around the airfield trying to keep warm in
some of the outbuildings, listening to their personal radios for the
call to run outside into the arctic day and defend their posts.

To complicate things, the commercial fishing fleet in the area is
fleeing southwest under the escort of the Danish coast guard frigate
HMDS Vaedderen (F359). There are also some unidentified container ships
and a cruise ship whose location are not currently known, Regardless,
the forces on Jan Mayen are unable to offer them meaningful assistance.

And that’s it. This place is certainly cold, and it’s certainly lonely.
Let’s see what the Russians plan to throw at Major Nansen and his
doughty band of missileers, signaleers, fighter jocks, and ASW techs.

**Second Post:**

Major Nansen sat at the flimsy metal table in the corrugated metal hut
at Jan Mayensfeld that served as his provisional HQ for defending the
island. The C-130 that had brought him had left him and his small band
of reinforcements on this cold rock hours before hours before, and he
was beginning to feel the loneliness of the place. The Hurc had also
dropped off enough ordnance for his four F-5s to conduct six sorties
with air-to-air Sidewinders and two sorties with the radio-guided
AGM-12B Bullpup air-to-ground missiles. It wasn’t much, but he was
hoping that it would come as an unpleasant surprise for any Russians who
wanted to venture his way. His three MANPAD teams each had five missiles
a piece as well to deter any low-level intruders.

He went over the plan he had just briefed to the air crew and to the
platoon leader and platoon sergeant of the ground troops before sending
them all to their posts. The plan for the defense of his rock reflected
his scarce resources. Four nearly obsolete fighters was nowhere near
enough to keep a CAP over the island at all times, especially in this
brutal arctic weather. Instead, one pilot would sit in his cockpit on
five minute notice to take off and vector to any incoming threat. The
LORAN-C radar that was the whole point of defending the island should
give them enough warning of any incoming bogeys, provided they didn’t
come in supersonic...Besides, keeping a fighter in the air might ruin
the surprise. The RBS-70 teams were arrayed around the airfield with
orders to engage only low-flying transports in case the Russians tried
an airborne assault, and the P-3 crew were in pre-flight check. They
would take off in about thirty minutes and start sweeping the seas
around the island with their radar. Before he’d left Bodo he’d received
a message from J2 saying that the Kiev could be somewhere to the north.
What was he supposed to do about that? Well, he could only worry about
what he could effect.

He didn’t have to wait long past 1300 to deal with his first crisis. The
LORAN-C radar picked up to small contacts due north of the island at a
range of about 150 kilometers, moving south at 480 kts.

“Order the ready fighter up,” said Nansen.

Moments later the twin-engine F-5A roared up the gravel runway and
rotated up into the deep blue arctic winter sky, then banked and turned
north. The pilot, a junior captain who had been assigned to lead the
four-ship element sent to Jan Mayen the previous day, was embarking on
his first combat sortie. He and his fellow pilots had missed the brutal
combat over northern Norway on the previous day in which more than a few
of the captain’s close friends had been either killed or gone missing.
Add to that the cowardly and shocking terrorist attack that had killed
the king along with much of the parliament and the prime minister, and
the captain was more than ready to strike back at the Russians. Whoever
these bogeys were, if they had red stars painted on, he was going to
splash them, he had no doubt about that. But first he had to find them.

The F-5A has no radar, so the young captain was receiving direction from
the LORAN-C radar on the island. This sensor had the drawback of only
being 2D, meaning that the ground controllers could give him a distance
and direction to the incoming contacts, but not an altitude. A light
layer of high clouds at about 7,000 meters meant that he would have to
search two strata of the sky. He decided to stay below the cloud layer
while ascending to just below the cloud layer on an off-bearing approach
to the bogeys, then if he didn’t see them he would climb up through the
clouds, reverse course, and come up on the intruders’ tails.

The lone F-5A streaked north, the captain scanning the skies in front f
him, seeing nothing. Eventually he leveled out at just under 6,000
meters. The ground controllers vectored him around behind the incoming
bogeys, who were now obviously on a course for the meteorology station
at the southwest end of the airfield. As the F-5A settled into a
southerly course, the captain also ascended through the wispy clouds.
His jet passed through the top layer of white and the captain’s eyes
immediately locked onto two gray and white painted fighter-sized objects
three kilometers in front and several thousand meters above him.

He continued to climb, and shortly radioed back to Jan Mayenfeld,
“they’re Forgers, Yak-38s. Tallyho.”

Just as the ground controllers received this report, they picked up
another pair of incoming bogeys behind the first element, though these
ones hadn’t been detected until much closer to the island.

Rising to 10,000 meters, the captain closed with the two Russian VTOL
aircraft until he could make out the green bombs slung underneath their
stubby wings. They obviously weren’t expecting enemy fighters in the
area. He lined up one in his sights, waited for the warble that told him
his Sidewinder had locked on, then squeezed the trigger. His first
missile leapt off the rails, but he didn’t watch it. The captain was
already putting his sights onto the second Russian jet. He quickly
launched his second missile of the engagement. This time he did watch.
The two white smoke trails covered the two kilometers of distance
quickly. Neither Russian pilot even knew he was under attack. The
trailing Forger exploded first, tumbling out of the sky. Just as the
second pilot was looking back to see what had suddenly happened to his
wingman, the second missile struck, shredding his aircrafts wings from
the body. He managed to eject as his plane disintegrated around him, but
as his parachute opened above he quickly realized that his fate in an
open raft on the Arctic ocean in February would not be pleasant, no
matter what happened.

The Norwegian captain had little time to celebrate. As soon as he saw
the second Yak start to tumble into through the clouds he began asking
for a vector to the second pair of bogeys. They were now closer than the
first, on a heading for the LORAN-C radar site. The ground controllers
told him to descend, banking on the analysis that this pair was at low
altitude since they had been detected later.

The captain swung his fighter in a wide loop to bring himself behind the
bogeys, then dove through the clouds. By this point the contacts were
within 30 kilometers of the island. If they were able to hit the radar
site then the whole mission of the garrison of Jan Mayen would be
essentially moot. As he passed beneath the clouds he spotted two
light-colored shapes flying at low-altitude above the dark ocean. More
Forgers. Kiev couldn’t be far off. These jets had short legs, especially
when carrying any sort of ordnance.

Once again, the captain lined up the trail Yak in his sights and
squeezed the trigger. Another Sidewinder streaked away. He lined up the
second Russian and squeezed again. This time nothing happened. His
fourth and last missile had malfunctioned. The captain cursed as his
third Sidewinder blew a third Russian jet out of the sky, and pushed his
throttles forward to close to gun range with the sole survivor.

He closed to within several hundred meters, and squeezed off a long
burst from his 20mm cannon. Just as he did so, however, the Russian
pilot, finally realizing his peril, banked right, and the shell and
tracers missed. The Norwegian turned with him. At this low altitude the
Russian’s ability to evade was close to nil, and the captain lined up a
second burst that peppered the Russian’s canopy. The Yak abruptly yawed
right, which caused it to dive and cartwheel into the sea. Elated, the
captain pulled up and began climbing. He was out of missiles and down to
half of his cannon ammo, but he had killed four Russians in the span of
five minutes. He was almost an ace!

With no more threats showing on their radars, the ground crew ordered
the captain to land and rearm.

**Third Post:**

Over 100 miles to the northwest, the Danish ocean patrol frigate HMDS
Vaedderen was trying to shepherd a large group of commercial fishing
vessels out of the way of the oncoming Russian fleet, wherever it was.
This mission was a tall order for a single vessel. The Vaedderen could
barely defend herself against a sophisticated opponent, much less defend
anyone else. Not that any of the fishing trawlers were likely to be a
target for a Russian missile or torpedo anyway, but that didn’t really
make her captain feel any better. His ship’s heaviest armament was a
single 76mm gun compliment by two 40mm Bofors mounts. He was in fact
better equipped to take part in the last world war as opposed to this
one. And now he had a problem.

The Vaedderen had been operating under EMCON except to send terse radio
signals to the fishing fleet to guide them southward. Minutes before his
ECM crew had picked up a single airborne radar of a type he had not
previously seen. Vaedderen was familiar with these waters and had seen
Russian maritime patrol aircraft aplenty. This was not one of those. As
the Danish crew watched, the source of the strange, short-ranged
air-to-air and air-to-ground radar approached the fishing fleet,
descended, and flew low over the northern-most fishing vessel. Soon the
fisherman was on the radio excitedly saying that it had been a Russian
fighter jet.

“That doesn’t make sense,” puzzled the captain. “Kiev is supposed to be
nearby, but she should just have Forgers onboard. Those don’t have
radars. The big Russian carriers couldn’t have gotten here yet. That’s
what you get for relying on amateurs for information”

A few minutes later the strange solitary bogey descended again towards a
second fishing trawler, buzzing this one at low altitude as well. Soon a
second civilian captain was on the radio, saying the same as the first.
It had been a Russian fighter. Yes, he was sure, he had seen the red
star on the wing. Did the navy think he was blind?

“Sir,” the XO said, “we got word yesterday that the second Russian
carrier was at sea when it should have still been in drydock. Maybe the
rushed their new VTOL aircraft into service as well?”

“Hmm…that makes sense,” said the captain. “If it’s true then that’s bad
news for us.”

The Russian aircraft, uninterested in the fishing vessels, turned
towards the next blip on its radar screen. As luck would have it, this
was the Vaedderen.

“Sir, the bogey is heading towards us,” reported the sensor crew.

The Russian aircraft was indeed their new VTOL aircraft, the Yak-141,
NATO reporting name Freestyle, which had been rushed into production and
service aboard the Soviet helicopter carriers in the build-up to the
outbreak of hostilities. It possessed a short-range radar and was an
order of magnitude more dangerous than the stubby Forgers. This
particular pilot’s mission was to recon the sea lanes in front of the
oncoming Kiev to ensure no enemy surface units were hiding in and among
the commercial ships.

The Vaedderen was at battle stations as the Russian jet came on. At a
few kilometers range the Russian ascended and banked away, having
apparently identified the Danish warship.

“Let us see what he has to throw at us,” muttered the Vaedderen’s
captain.

They didn’t have long to wait. The Yakovlev jet continued banking until
it had come around once again on a course directly for the Danish ship
at a range of ten kilometers. The two objects detached from under its
wings and ignited.

The Kh-31 missile (NATO reporting name AS-17 Krypton) was a tactical
radar homing anti-ship missile with a speed of Mach 3.5. Two had been
targeted on the Vaedderen by the Russian pilot. Fortunately for the
Danes, one missile malfunctioned immediately after launch, swerving away
90 degrees to the left and streaking away to nowhere. The second
missile, however, bored in. Vaedderen’s main and secondary armament
hammered away with the rhythmic crack of the 76mm cannon and the rapid
pounding of the Bofors, but the chances of hitting the speeding missile
over open sights was almost nil. Not of the shells or shrapnel
connected. Just as the missile was beginning its terminal dive, the
Vaedderen’s captain ordered two chaff rockets launched. These exploded
into clouds of reflective metal strips around the small warship,
confusing the missile. The Kh-31 struck the water several hundred meters
behind the ship, and the Danish crew let out a collective sigh of
relief.

They had little time to celebrate, however. The Russian jet was
following its missiles in with the intent of strafing the enemy vessel.
The 76mm and Bofors resumed their hammering, again to little effect. The
Soviet pilot streaked by without firing and pulled his fighter into a
sharp turn to bring his aircraft to bear once more on the frigate.

This time, as the Yak-141 approached, a lucky shell from the 76mm gun
exploded just to the side of the canopy. The explosion and shrapnel
actually caused very little damage, but the Russian pilot, flying at
wave-top level for his gun run, jerked his stick to the side, then
corrected too late. one wing struck the water, and the jet tumbled
violently in an explosion of white salty froth.

The Vaedderen’s firing ceased immediately. Her crew could hardly believe
their luck. They were completely un-equipped to deal with a modern
aerial threat, and yet they had survived a missile attack and destroyed
their attacker.

Vaedderen’s captain, not wanting to press his luck, immediately ordered
the ship to full speed and plotted a course southeast.

**Fourth Post:**

Back at Jan Mayenfeld, Major Nansen was dealing with a renewed and more
dangerous threat to his post. A message had come in from J2 at Akershus
fortress that a Russian container ship, the SKR Azov, was attempting to
transit south in the confusion of the fleeing fishermen and merchantmen.
This particular Soviet container ship had been modified with a
helicopter landing pad and was reported to be carrying barges and a
marine landing force, destination unknown. Nansen didn’t want to know
how they gotten that intel. Regardless, J2 was passing along that if
they located the Azov they were to do what they could to damage or sink
her. That was a tall order, given that his air-to-surface arsenal
consisted of exactly four obsolescent Bullpup missiles with inadequate
warheads.

Nansen ordered the commander of his lone P-3, whose crew was busy on the
frigid gravel tarmac preparing their aircraft for an ASW mission, to
sweep the ocean around Jan Mayen with his radar once he was airborne and
to investigate visually any unidentified surface contacts.

Of more immediate concern were the six contacts in close formation that
had just appeared on his technicians’ radar screen approaching from the
northeast.

Nansen ordered his second ready F-5A to launch. The first was just
entering its landing pattern after splashing the four Yak-38s. This
aircraft landed and taxied. The captain, despite the cold, opened his
canopy and pumped his fist to celebrate his four victories, the stopped
as the second F-5A roared past him and rotated up into the dark blue
sky. This second pilot, also a young captain, was no less eager than his
commander to hurt the Russians who had attacked his country.

He headed northeast, staying below the clouds, and guided by directions
from the ground radar station. Just as he closed with the formation of
intruders he ascended, passed through the clouds...and found himself
passing through the middle of a formation of Tu-16 Badger jet bombers.

He flashed upwards, right the through the middle of the surprised Soviet
air crews, the banked hard and dove onto their tails, loosing one
Sidewinder after another. The enemy formation was just crossing over the
coat of Jan Mayen on a course for their airfield. The Norwegian watched
with satisfaction as three of the bombers crumpled, their wings folding
in on themselves with gouts of flame exploding from their fuel tanks.
Then he cursed. His fourth missile had malfunctioned, streaking off
towards the dim winter sun. He closed and walked a stream of cannon
shells into a fourth bomber, but the surviving two were already
disgorging their bomb loads over the island. The captain watched in
horror as two sticks of green bombs fell through the clouds towards his
temporary home.

Major Nansen didn’t have any warning of the bombs descending towards the
airfield. He caught sight of black objects falling through the clouds
with just enough time to throw himself on the ground and shout a warning
to the other people in the warming shack with him.

The Russians, thrown off by the savage and unanticipated attack, and
also bombing blind, had released their bomb loads with under less than
ideal conditions. One stick fell into the lagoon to the southeast of the
narrow neck of the island. The other stick fell somewhat more
accurately, straddling the north end of the runway and causing shrapnel
damage to one of the fuel tanks, but thankfully not igniting it.

The Russian bombers turned east and pushed their throttles to the max to
escape. The Norwegian F-5A’s pilot had expended his remaining cannon
ammunition at this point and could do nothing to impede their escape.
Nansen, relieved that his post had survived yet another attack, ordered
him to land.

“Well,” said Major Nansen, “I guess that means their coming. They would
not have bombed us for the fun of it. And next time, they will know that
we have more here than a few radar technicians...”

**Fifth Post:**

About this time, a second Yak-141 was making its short take-off role
from the Kiev and heading southwest to try to accomplish what the first
Yak-141 pilot had astonishingly failed to do: sink the exposed and
under-armed Danish patrol frigate Vaedderen.

The Vaedderen’s crew. still operating under EMCON, detected the oncoming
Russian jet by the Yakovlev’s short-range radar emissions some several
dozen miles out and the captain ordered the ship to action stations.
They didn’t have long to wait. The Freestyle pressed in until its
captain was sure of his target. He then targeted and launched his two
Kh-31 missiles at the nearly defenseless ship. This time both missiles
acquired their target and began their terminal attack dive at the ship.
Once again the Vaedderen’s meager guns pounded away at the air in a vain
attempt to knock the supersonic missiles down.

At the last second, the Vaedderen’s captain once again ordered chaff
rockets launched. Two shot out of the ships launchers and exploded,
enveloping the vessel in a cloud of reflective metal strips. One of the
missiles lost its lock and streaked over the Danish vessel’s deck at an
altitude of several hundred feet, eventually impacting the water several
kilometers beyond. The second missile’s radar maintained a weak lock on
the frigate and continued to dive. Time stood still for the Vaedderen’s
crew as those on deck all watched the small object that was tormenting
them come on. Many forgot to duck as the weapon closed the last few
hundred meters...and impacted the water just 15 meters short of the
ship, exploding on impact and showering the Vaedderen in frigid water
and white salty foam.

The Danish Captain, who had been cringing as he anticipated the
destruction of his small ship, let out a long, ragged breath as he
realized that he had somehow managed to evade yet another attack with
his vessel unscathed. This sort of luck couldn’t possible last.

Back at Jan Mayensfeld, the island’s lone P-3 finally bumped down the
gravel runway and lifted off into the sky on its dual mission of using
radar to scan the waters around the island and then to begin laying
sonar buoys to try detect any transiting Soviet subs. The aircraft
banked north and began to climb as the radar technician energized his
powerful search radar. The sensor immediately began detecting numerous
contacts to the north and northwest.

The contacts to the northwest the P-3’s crew knew to be vessels of the
fleeing fishing fleet and their weak Danish escort. What interested them
initially were those they saw to the north. First they picked up a lone
surface contact moving southwest at fifteen knots. This would need to be
investigated as possibly being the Russian container ship Azov. More
interesting contacts began to appear about 120 kilometers beyond this
solitary vessel. Seven blips were arranged with six in a rough circle
around two larger blips in the middle. This could only be the Kiev
battle group, as no other contacts would have been close enough to
launch the Forgers that the island’s fighters had splashed earlier.

Additionally, the Orion’s passive sensors were picking up radar
emissions from several ASW helicopters around the formation as well as
two more Yak-141s that seemed to be pulling CAP over the vessels.

The Orion’s crew flew towards the lone southernmost contact and managed
to identify it as a large tanker through their binoculars. This contact,
at least, as not the Azov. Not wanting to get any closer to the enemy
battle group and its CAP, the P-3’s pilot banked his aircraft and headed
southeast to sweep the seas to the east of Jan Mayen. He was rewarded
with two further contacts to investigate, one to the northeast and one
to the east of the island, both moving southwest at 15 knots. The P-3
flew to the northernmost contact first and descended to visually
identify. The crew quickly realized that the vessel matched the
description of the Russian container ship Azov, and the helicopter deck
rigged amidships confirmed her as the enemy in sheep’s clothing. The
P-3’s commander radioed back to Major Nansen to report that he had
located the sneaky Russian.

Upon receiving the news, Nansen ordered one of his two Bullpup-armed
F-5As to launch and vector towards the vessel, and to attack it. Minutes
later the third Freedom Fighter roared down the gravel strip and rotated
into the sky, maintaining a low altitude and northeast course towards
the Azov.

The lone F-5A closed the distance to the Russian container ship rapidly,
and once the pilot had the vessel in sight high launched both of his
radio-guided AGM-12Bs at it. The weapons dropped free, and one
immediately malfunctioned, turned south a flew off on a vector to
nowhere. Cursing, the Norwegian pilot guided his remaining missile into
the medium-sized Soviet container ship. The Bullpup impacted directly
amidships and exploded, but its 250lb warhead was far too small to be
fatal to the large cargo ship. The most serious damage occurred when the
explosion punctured the fuel tanks of the diminutive W-3 Anakonda
utility helicopter that had been tethered to the jury-rigged flight deck
and ignited the spilling fuel, causing a fire that belched black smoke
into the frigid air as the on-board naval infantry battled to control
the damage.

The F-5’s pilot flew close enough to confirm that his attack had not
been fatal, then reversed course and ascended to pull CAP over the
island with his remaining cannon ammunition.

Back at the airfield, Major Nansen, disappointed with the outcome of his
attack, ordered his second AGM-12B-armed F-5A into the air. This one too
took off and maintained a northeast course to the stricken Russian
vessel, locating it easily because of the oily black column of smoke
rising from the burning helicopter. He lined up and launched both of his
own missiles, and watched as both flew true towards the ship. The
Russian captain had luck of his own, however, and a last minute radical
course change caused both Bullpups to miss, though one impacted the
water only ten yards from the Azov, peppering the ship’s steel hull with
shrapnel. With that, the entire air-to-surface arsenal on Jan Mayen had
been expended, to little effect.

**Sixth Post:**

By now the early arctic dusk was falling over Jan Mayen, but that didn’t
stop an alert soldier at the meteorological station at the south end of
Jan Mayensfeld from seeing something suspicious off the southern coast
of the island. The station’s commander picked up his transmitter and
called Major Nansen.

“Viking, this is Odin, over,” came the metallic voice through Nansen’s
receiver.

“Go ahead Odin,” responded the major.

“Viking, we just saw a small boat come into sight and beach at the
southern end of the island. Several men got out, pulled the boat ashore,
and then started moving up the mountain. They appeared to be armed.”

Nansen was immediately alarmed. “Did you get a count? What were their
weapons,” he asked sharply.

“We didn’t get any of that,” said the meteorological NCO sheepishly. “It
is getting dark, and they were more than a kilometer away.”

Nansen realized they had done well just to spot what had to be a
Spetznaz recon team. But where had they come from? There was now ship
out there. It had to be a submarine close in, and he just happened to
have an aircraft in the air that was specialized in hunting submarines,
with a full load of fuel, sonobuoys, and torpedoes.

“Thank you, Odin. Well done. Keep your eyes peeled. We’ll send what help
down your way w e can.”

Nansen called in his senior NCO, a hard-bitten infantry soldier who was
acting as the platoon sergeant of his small band of soldiers and airmen.
“Sergeant, get together what soldiers who aren’t gainfully employed
right now and take a patrol down to the southern hill. See if you can
spot whatever Spetznaz team the Russians just landed on this rock.

“Yes sir.” The sergeant walked off to bundle up and rouse soldiers from
their bunks for what was sure to be a bone-chilling hike up the island’s
low southern mountain.

Next Nansen picked up another radio transmitter and called the P-3 which
was just overflying the third lone contact it had detected on its radar,
and neutral small container ship. He ordered the P-3 to concentrate on
the shallow waters just south of the island. The four-engine plane
banked and headed west. Once it arrived off the southern tip of the
island it started dropping sonobuoys, both passive and active. These
failed for a while to pick any unnatural sound. Then, just as the P-3’s
crew began to shift their search area to the west, the easternmost
passive buoy picked up a faint contact that moved slowly to the south.

The P-3’s crew pounced, dropping passive buoys all around the faint
contact that quickly resolved into a noisy twin-screwed Echo-II class
submarine moving south away from the island at six knots.

“We’ve got him,” said the Orion’s captain as he banked into his final
sweep to drop active buoys and pinpoint the location of the Soviet sub.
The active buoys dropped free.

“Sir, we’ve got a problem,” the lead sonar technician reported. “The
seafloor is so shallow and uneven that the active pings are actually
interfering with our ability to pinpoint he Russian. Our torpedoes might
also have a problem acquiring under these conditions.”

This wasn’t what the pilot wanted to hear as he stalked his first
Russian sub of the war. “We’ll drop anyway, see if we can spook him into
increasing speed. Even if we miss, we should be able to get a better fix
on him.”

The P-3 banked again and settled into its attack run. At the calculated
spot the big aircraft’s bomb-bay doors opened and a single Mk46 torpedo,
one of eight the Orion carried on this mission, dropped free into the
dark waters below.

“Torpedo is pinging...it has gone into acquisition mode, closing in
and...”

Those aircrew near a window saw a flash in the water that instantly
turned to foam behind them.

“Did we get him?” asked the pilot.

“No sir, I still hear his screws. He’s picked up speed, sounds to be
making turns now for fifteen or sixteen knots. Our torpedo must have
guided onto something on the bottom.”

“Damn,” muttered the pilot, “let’s get a better fix and reengage.”

“We’ll need to drop more buoys,” the lead sonarman reported. “At this
speed he’ll be beyond our detection radius soon.”

The P-3 flew over the course of the Echo II, which was now attempting to
flee southeast, its captain knowing now that he was hunted. More buoys
dropped into the water, then another torpedo. This weapon performed as
poorly as the last, much to the Orion crew’s disgust.

The same was true for the next six torpedoes the Orion’s crew dropped
over the next half hour. Their active radar homed in on the seafloor and
exploded without damaging anything more than the Russian sub crew’s
nerves.

“All right,” said the aircraft commander. “We’ve only got two fish left.
We need to make them count. I want a thick spread of active buoys to
really pinpoint his location, then we’re going to drop right on his
tail!”

And so it went. The Orion did one pass dropping four DICASS buoys in a
tight string right along the Russian’s course, the coming around again
and dropping the second-to-last Mk46 just a few hundred meters behind
the Echo’s thrashing propellers. This time the torpedo guided onto the
correct target, exploding against the Russian submarine’s rudder,
shredding it.

“Sir, I think we hit him,” reported the sonarman, he’s slowed, but I
don’t hear any breakup noises. Much scraping of metal though, we’ll have
no trouble pinpointing him now.”

“Reengage,” was the commander’s cold reply.

The P-3 came around again and dropped its sole remaining Mk-46. This
weapon too guided on the Russian sub, whose captain was just about to
order an emergency blow to get to the surface. He never got the chance.
The torpedo bore in and struck the Echo behind the sail, killing the
bridge crew and settling the submarine on the seafloor that had been
their protection just minutes before.

Back on Jan Mayen Major Nansen reported the death of the Echo to
Akershus fortress and also his F-5’s failure to sink the container ship
Azov. MoD seemed curiously unconcerned about this, and were just happy
to know where the ship was. Unknown to Nansen, the Sklinna, a Norwegian
diesel submarine patrolling off the southeast coast of Jan Mayen, was by
good fortune astride the Azov’s projected course and was even now
receiving orders to sink the Russia.

**Seventh Post:**

As the Orion’s crew finished hunting the Russian submarine, yet another
not entirely unexpected threat was materializing to the northeast of Jan
Mayen. Ten large, slow-moving contacts had appeared at the edge of the
island’s radar’s detection range, flying in tight formation. Nansen
immediately ordered two of his F-5A’s aloft, the same two that had been
armed for air-to-air operation to begin with. These had been refueled
and rearmed and were now ready for a second sortie. The two
air-to-surface armed F-5s, who had flown CAP over the island with their
cannons until their fuel ran low, were in the process of rearming with
Sidewinders as well, but they would not be ready for some time yet as
the meager ground crew struggled against the cold in the gathering
arctic night. One of the Freedom Fighters had managed to ambush a Soviet
maritime patrol aircraft that had passed to close to Jan Mayen’s
southeast coast, before he landed.

The two Norwegian fighters took off in formation with the flight leader,
the captain who had flown the first sortie of the day, in the lead.
Nansen was almost certain that the approaching Russian aircraft were
transports carrying the troops earmarked to seize his island, but he
couldn’t be sure that there weren’t long-range interceptors mixed in
with the heavies. He doubted it, though. The Russian frontline fighters
had taken a beating over northern Norway the day before and besides,
they weren’t expecting fighters out here, right?

The Russian aircraft, An-12 Cub’s, were indeed carrying a battalion of
Soviet paratroopers with orders to land on a seize the island. They had
taken off hours before and in the chaos of the ongoing global war had
not received the warning that their objective was more heavily defended
than it ought to be. They would pay heavily for their ignorance.

The Norwegian pilots picked up their quarry by the light of the sun
setting at their backs and attacked from the front and below. They
volleyed off all eight of their sidewinders for six quick kills, then
looped around back to down the remaining four. The Russian trail gunners
reminded the Norwegians that these transports had some teeth, but the
F-5A’s avoided the ineffectual defensive fire with relative ease. In
just five minutes ten Russian transports with the better part of an
elite airborne battalion were in the frigid Arctic Ocean.

Now both F-5s were out of missiles and almost out of cannon ammo. This
didn’t bother the flight leader as he whooped and pumped his fist. He
was a ace twice over! And only on the second day of the war!

As they circled northeast of the island waiting for the other two F-5s
to complete their arming, the GLOBUS site on the island detected to
airborne jammers approaching from the northeast as well. Major Nansen
ordered his airborne fighters to investigate.

The flight leader had no qualms about doing this. He was excited about
the prospect of yet another kill. But as his fighter cruised north at
10,000 meters, the situation changed. His warning receiver began
screaming at him and he craned his neck around the horizon to see where
an attack could be coming from. The he saw it. A missile was approaching
from the north, and beyond it he could just make out two fighter-sized
objects. The Russian CAP over Kiev, two Yak-141s, must have turned off
their radars and approached undetected.

The captain put his aircraft into a diving turn, but it was too late.
The AA-11 Alamo, a semi-active radar homing missile, exploded off the
F-5’s left wing, sending into a spiraling descent. The captain managed
just to pull his ejection handles. His chute deployed, and he floated to
the dark waters below, wondering how and if he would survive the coming
hours, his aerial victories now forgotten.

The captain’s wingman was luckier. The missile targeted on him failed to
guide, and his diving escape shook the Russian pursuers, who were
themselves short of fuel. He leveled out below the clouds, and the
Russians turned back for Kiev.

**Eighth Post:**

Major Nansen soon realized that the loss of one of his fighters could
not have come at a worse time. Behind the two jammer aircraft that the
island’s sensors had detected soon came ten more transports, this time
big An-22s, on a course for Jan Mayen. The only thing standing in their
way was the surviving airborne F-5A, and this only had a few bursts of
cannon ammunition left. Nansen got on the radio and ordered the pilot to
do what he could.

The F-5 climbed back into the sky after evading the Russian CAP, and
vectored for the oncoming transports. The young officer was shaken after
the loss of his wingman, but he had a job to do. His jet passed through
the clouds into the waning Arctic light and his sharp eyes caught the
last glints of sunlight off of the formation of approaching four-engine
birds. The F-5 closed the formation from below, and at point blank range
put a long burst of 20mm shells streamed into the cockpit of the lead
An-22. The big aircraft lazily banked until it was on its back, falling
out of the sky, as the small, nimble fighter shot up through the
formation and turned in a wide loop to dive back onto the remaining nine
Russians. This time the Norwegian came down on their tails and put
another long burst of 20mm shells into the wing of the trailing Antanov.
The two starboard engines caught fire and the transport fell out of
formation, diving to try to put out the flames. It didn’t work. The wing
collapsed under the strain of the fire and the dive, and the wreckage,
both aircraft and human, plummeted through the clouds into the sea.

The F-5’s pilot lined up a third transport and squeezed the trigger.
Nothing happened. He quickly realized that he had expended all of his
shells and now could do nothing but watch as the Russians approached his
base. He swore in frustration before breaking off to avoid the
ineffectual fire coming from the surviving Russian tail gunners.

Back on the ground, Nansen was out in the howling cold urging his ground
crews to get the other two F-5s into the air, but nothing he said could
overcome the atrociously cold and icy conditions that his ground crews
had to fight through to load the ordnance. One F-5 was nearly ready, but
the sergeant in charge of the aircraft was saying that it would still be
at least five minutes until the pilot could taxi.

“Well,” Nansen said testily, “there are going to be Russian paratroopers
in just a few minutes, so get it done!”

As it turned out, the attack of the surviving airborne F-5A had effects
beyond the downing to two transports. The Russian pilots were already
rattled from listening in on the panicked radio transmissions coming
from the lead wave of An-12s as they had been annihilated a few minutes
earlier. Their fear and confusion had increased as the lone F-5 slashed
through their formation, destroying the lead and trail jets. Now, as
they approached the tiny drop zone that Jan Mayen’s airfield presented,
the Russian formation fell apart. The mission commander had gone down in
the lead aircraft, while the alternate commander had been in the trail,
and now the surviving pilots found themselves leaderless. Some pressed
on to drop their cargo of paratroopers and vehicles while other pilots
decided to remain at altitude and overfly the island before turning back
for Russia.

Those that descended to allow the paratroopers to jump badly misjudged
the drop zone, and even worse turned the jump lights green while still
too high. This caused the Russian airborne troops to exit the aircraft
too early and too high. Normally this would only have meant that they
would have landed more scattered than usual. Here in the Arctic ocean it
was a disaster. Three aircraft dropped their loads, consisting of
roughly one hundred paratroopers and three BMD vehicles. More than half
of the of the paratroopers landed in the water and either drowned under
their weight of their equipment or expired due to hypothermia. Those
fortunate enough to fall on land were widely scattered across the saddle
that formed the narrow neck of the island. BY a stroke of good fortune,
all three BMDs descended over dry ground, though far up the slope of the
southern mountain rather than onto the flat isthmus on which the
airfield sat.

The Norwegian platoon sergeant whom Nansen had sent with a
cobbled-together patrol to try to locate the Spetznaz intruder had been
trudging his heavily bundled group of ten cooks, radar techs, and ground
crewmen up the slope of Jan Mayen’s southern island when he began to
hear the explosions and see the dull flashes through the clouds of the
air battle taking place to the northeast. The grizzled old infantryman
though he’d counted eight or nine explosions. Then there had been a
period of silence, followed by several more widely spaced explosions. He
though he’d spotted a burning aircraft fall through the clouds over the
shoulder of the northern peak, but it had happened too quickly for him
to be sure. Then he heard the scream of jet engines passing low over
head, and finally he saw the dark shapes of what could only be
parachutes falling through the clouds along the neck of the island. In
the darkness he couldn’t gauge how many, but he knew at that moment he
had to get back to the airfield as quickly as possible. He turned his
tired troops around and started trudging back down the mountain towards
Jan Mayenfeld. As they walked, the sergeant saw the blue glow from the
tailpipes of an F-5 as the fighter taxied onto the frozen gravel runway
and took off.

The jet that the platoon sergeant had seen climbed quickly in pursuit of
the withdrawing Russian transports. The plot was able to catch two that
had dropped their paratroopers and down them with Sidewinders, but the
surviving six AN-22s made good their escape. Nansen called off the
pursuit in case any more Russians were en route. He doubted it at this
point and quickly sent the F-5 to ambush one of the Russian EW aircraft
lurking to the northwest once the third and final surviving Freedom
Fighter was aloft. One AN-12 jammer fell to Norwegian missiles. Warned,
the other turned north and fled for the safety of the Kiev’s CAP.

**Ninth Post:**

While the battle in the skies over Jan Mayen played out, more drama was
occurring under the waves to the southeast and north of the island. The
captain of the Sklinna had kept his boat at periscope depth as he moved
northeast along the southern coast of Jan Mayen, closing with the
wounded Russian freighter Azov. Intercepting the Russian ship had proven
to be ridiculously easy. Before night fell she had been belching a
column of black smoke over the horizon, and after dark the fires from
the burning aviation fuel from the destroyed helicopter acted as a
beacon as the ships approached each other.

Kaptein Bulls, the Sklinna’s commander, allowed the wounded Russian to
approach within a mile before he launched two wire-guided torpedoes. The
Azov never had a chance, her crew never even spotted the wakes of the
oncoming weapons. The two fish exploded under the oncoming freighter,
breaker her keel and tearing huge holes in her hull below the waterline.
She sank quickly.

Under normal circumstances many of the crew and passengers would have
survived the sinking. But this was the Arctic, in winter, at night. None
of the souls on board the Azov reached land.

North of the island USS Jacksonville had been approaching the Kiev
battle group head-on based on the data gathered by the P-3 out of Jan
Mayen that had made its way via Major Nansen up the chain of command to
CINCLANT. Commander Dickel had given his crew time to stand down and
rest in anticipation of action. Now they were at battle stations as the
first sonar returns came in from the Russian formation as it passed
through the convergence zone about thirty miles ahead of Jacksonville.

The American sub’s sonar crew tallied two frigates, an Udaloy, a
Kresta-class cruiser, and the Kiev herself. Troublingly, the Udaloy
appeared to on a very nearly reciprocal bearing to Jacksonville. Dickel
ordered a course correction to bring his boat past the southern flank of
the Russian ASW destroyer. He would have to deal with that dangerous
ship if he wanted a chance at the prize.

Half an hour passed as Jacksonville and the Russian formation continued
to close. The Russian ships began to appear again on American sonar
sensors after they had disappeared through the convergence zone.
Jacksonville was angling south of the Udaloy, but not far enough. Dickel
decided on a more aggressive course of action to crack the Russian
screen.

“Weps, unload those Mk48s. I want all four Harpoons in our tubes. Well
use them on the Udaloy, the slip in through the hole left in the screen
and do the Kiev with torpedoes.”

Jacksonville’s torpedo room worked frantically to pull the big Mk48s out
of the sub’s four torpedo tubes and replace them with the missile
canisters. By the time the job was done the Russian destroyer was
dangerously close.

“Sir,” said the XO in a low voice, “are you sure about this? We are
going to pinpoint our position as soon as we let those missiles fly.”

“I’m counting on the fact that they’re going to be too busy dealing with
the afermath of our attack to be able to track us effectively,”
responded Dickel, also in a low, and annoyed, voice.

“Aye sir,” responded the XO. Dickel was a good boss, if a bit too
aggressive, but the XO had also learned not to cross him when he had
made up his mind. This was one of those times.

“Bring us shallow,” ordered Dickel.

Jacksonville ascended until her crew could feel the action of the waves
just above the sail and periscope. The sonar room did a final check on
the range and bearing to the Udaloy, and then the American ship began
launching her missiles. One after another, four Harpoons burst out of
the dark water, ignited, and rocketed north towards the Russian
destroyer.

The Russian defenses, already on high alert, reacted well to the attack.
One after another the American missiles were knocked out of the sky by a
combination of SAMs and gunfire. Only one remained, but this one flew
true and plunged into the Udaloy amidships before exploding. Initially
the damage did not appear to be too severe, and the Udaloy’s captain
continued in his role as ASW screen commander, now with an urgent task
to find and sink the American submarine that had wounded his ship. Deep
inside the destroyer, however, fires from the initial explosion began to
spread.

Dickel hadn’t waited to assess the effectiveness of his attack. He dove
his submarine deep and increased speed to clear datum, breaking contact
toward the center of the Russian formation. For about a quarter of an
hour Jacksonville moved north without hearing any sort of counterstroke
from the Soviets. Dickel ordered his boat to slow and ascend in
preperation for beginning to stalk the Kiev. Unknown to him, helicopters
from the Kiev and her escorts had been swarming the water above him,
performing MAD runs and dropping passive listening buoys in an attempt
to localize the threat. Dickel’s decision to slow down allowed all of
these sensors to finally get a fix on his boat’s position. The Udaloy,
whose captain was only beginning to realize that the damage the missile
had done might have been worse than initially though, turned his ship
and launched a Metel anti-submarine rocket.

“Conn, sonar, torpedo in the water! It’s right behind us sir!” called
the lean sonarman.

Dickel cringed. This had been his greatest fear. Had he been too
aggressive? The next few minutes would tell.

“All ahead flank, take us deep! Launch countermeasures!” he ordered.

It was for naught. The Russian torpedo was too close and had entered the
water in such a way that the first thing its sensors saw was the
American submarine only a quarter mile away. As the Jacksonville’s screw
thrashed the water in a desperate bid for speed, the Russian weapon
closed and impacted against the sub’s keel. Water flooded in, and this,
along with her already downward momentum, carried the American submarine
and her captain and crew to a watery grave on the floor of the Arctic
Ocean. In the end, she would not rest there alone.

Above the waves, the fires started on the Udaloy by the American Harpoon
were beginning to spread and rage out of control. Despite valiant
efforts by her crew, the fires eventually reached the magazines that
housed the ammunition for the ship’s two 100mm guns. A rumbling
explosion shook the destroyer for several seconds, and then she began to
settle at the bow. Her captain ordered abandon ship, and one of the
Krivak-class frigates came alongside to rescue the survivors. Ahead of
them, Kiev and her now weakened screen plunged onward, headed southwest.

**Tenth Post:**

Back at Jan Mayenfeld Major Nansen was trying to make sense of what was
going on. He knew Russian paratroopers had landed, but in the dark he
couldn’t be sure how many or where. With all of his aircraft in the air,
he had made sure that everyone, ground crews included, were carrying
their rifles and sidearms and were deployed around the airfield to repel
an attack. There wasn’t any more ordnance to load onto his small air
force at this point anyway. Still, he was short his infantry platoon
sergeant and the patrol he had sent south several hours before. He was
dearly feeling their absence now as he waited for elite Soviet
paratroopers to appear out of the howling arctic night. He had already
ordered his technicians to prepare their radars, radios, and codebooks
for destruction in the event of an attack. There was realistically no
way he could hold off a determined assault by even a platoon of
disciplined Russian infantry.

Two miles to the southwest, on the face of the volcanic mountain that
formed the southern end of Jan Mayen, the platoon sergeant and his
motley ten-man patrol were working their way back downhill in a file the
dark when the sergeant, in the lead, raised his hand and signaled for
silence. He strained his eyes into the darkness down the mountain and
slowly began to discern three boxy shapes spread out in front of him
with the smaller dark shapes of soldiers moving between them. He could
hear the soft clicking and clacking of weapons and equipment as what
could only be the Russian paratroopers below him stumbled about in the
volcanic terrain. Then he smelled it; diesel fuel. The boxy shapes began
to make sense as he strained his eyes. They were BMD assault vehicles.
As he surveyed, he found that one had landed on a steep slope and was
laying on its side, another was still attached to its drop platform with
figures huddled around the engine compartment, and the third, further
down the slope, appeared to be abandoned. This impression was dispelled
when the engine of the third BMD suddenly coughed to life and idled.

The platoon sergeant felt despair as he saw the small vehicle. If he had
even one puny LAW, he could easily put it out of action. But whoever had
sent him to this godforsaken rock had, in their wisdom, failed to supply
him with even the most rudimentary of ant-armor weapons. That vehicle,
along with what looked to be a platoon of Russian paras, was more than
enough combat power to overrun the airfield and radar station, if and
when they started moving. If they got that second vehicle moving, even
worse. The third was obviously a loss.

As the Norwegian sergeant knelt in his white smock, cradling his rifle,
a crazy plan began to form in his mind. He turned and told his patrol to
take cover and stay put. Then, to their amazement, he stood straight up,
slung his rifle over his should, and walked confidently down the hill.
He wasn’t noticed until he was right in among the Russians, who quickly
turned and trained the Kalashnikovs on him. The sergeant raised his had
a called out in Russian, “Dobre noche!” And then in English, “who is in
charge here?”

For a moment no one moved, and he began to fear that this crazy gamble
was turning out to be a bad throw of the dice, but then a figure stepped
out from the semicircle of barrels facing the Norwegian and said, also
in English, “I am Major Pivo and…I suppose I am in charge. What do you
want?”

The Russian major seemed shaken, the sergeant noticed, and as he looked
around he realized that so did the rest of the Russians. They didn’t
look like a confident group of elite soldiers about to make an attack.
Their body language told him they were stunned and demoralized.

“Major,” the Norwegian said, “you and your men appear to be in some
difficulty. So is my commander. With you here, no one will come to take
us off this rock, and regulations prevent us from surrendering to you.
On the other hand, I gather that you only have a small fraction of your
force gathered, and we have sunk what I expect was your ship, the Azov,
that was supposed to bring in your supplies.” At his news he saw the
Russian flinch, and he knew he had him..

He continued, “we can’t surrender to you, but we can’t defeat you
either. But let me tell you, we will destroy and burn everything left on
this island before we let you have it. You will freeze or starve in
days. But if you leave your vehicles, and come back to the airfield with
us, we will give you shelter and food. Our role in this war is done, as
is yours. We can sit out this war together. Whoever wins, we will still
be alive, and eventually the winners will come to take us all home.
There is nothing else either of us can do for our countries on this
rock.”

The Russian major, who had seen some desperate days in Afghanistan as a
junior officer, stood and considered…

To say that Major Nansen was surprised when his trusted platoon sergeant
arrived at the airfield in the early hours of the morning at the head of
a column of forty armed and shivering Russians would have been an
understatement. The arrangement that the sergeant had worked out was
even more of a shock. But as he considered it, he saw the wisdom of the
grizzled NCO’s ways. He had no weapons left with which he could hurt the
Russian offensive, and his post had served its purpose of warning NATO
that the Russians were headed for Iceland. Even his radar was really of
no further use to NATO, as the Russians would surely demolish it in the
morning from the air or sea. He had hurt the Russians far worse than he
could have hoped, destroying a significant portion of Kiev’s air group,
sunk a Russian nuke sub and an amphip masquerading as a freighter, and
destroyed the better part of a Russian airborne battalion along with
their transport aircraft. Now he was out of weapons and out of options.

He ordered the P3 and F5s to land, refuel, and then head south. He then
welcomed Major Pivo into his office where the two began to discuss how
they would spend a very awkward remainder of the war together on this
very cold and lonely place.

A few hours later, a bright orange life raft floated northeast of Jan
Mayen. It was the Norwegian captain who had commanded the four F5s on
the island before being shot down by the Russian Yak-141. He had
parachuted into the water and amazingly managed to inflate and climb
into his rescue raft. Now he was shivering violently and beginning to
hallucinate as his body descended into hypothermia. Just then, a great
dark monster broke through the waves next to his raft and rose higher
and higher above him.

Kaptain Bulls on the Norwegian submarine Sklinna had proceeded northeast
after sinking the Azov and stayed shallow. This had allowed him to pick
up the captain’s rescue beacon and after the F-5 was downed and engaged
in his secondary mission of rescuing downed airmen. Now he was long down
from the small sail of his submarine at the raft, hoping he was not too
late. Three crewmen were on the rocking deck of the submarine pulling
the raft on. They dragged the pilot out and half carried, half dragged
him below. As soon as they were inside Bulls dropped down and ordered
his ship to dive. Then he went to the galley where the violently
shivering was being covered with warm blankets and offered a steaming
cup of hot coffee.

Sklinna turned south, awaiting orders that would give them more Russian
targets.

The Battle of Jan Mayen was over. The NATO outpost was neutralized after
a fashion, but at huge and unexpected cost to the Soviets. And now the
NATO command knew that the Russians were coming, and they were coming
for Iceland.
