**German Army (*Deutsches Heer*)**

The current form of the German Army was founded on 12 November 1955,
when West Germany joined the NATO alliance and reformed the military
branch of government (*Bundeswehr*). By 1985 the army was at its
established strength of 12 Divisions. The diagram below depicts the
peacetime organizational structure. However, in wartime 3<sup>rd</sup>
Panzer Division (I Corps) would transfer to the 1<sup>st</sup>
Netherlands Corps, while 26 & 27 *Fallschirmjäger* Brigades would join
1<sup>st</sup> *Fallschirmjäger* Division and become SHAPE reserve.

The **Schleswig-Holstein Territorial Command (SH)** in wartime would
take charge of several home defence Brigades and Regiments and operate
as a Division or possibly Corps level HQ under **Allied Command Baltic
Approaches (BALTAP)**. 6<sup>th</sup> Panzergrenadier Division would
also come under command BALTAP and, depending on the situation, operate
independently or under the command of **SH**.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image1.png" style="width:6.97361in;height:5.79375in" />

The pre-unification army had a strength of approximately 340,000
regulars and 717,000 reserves and territorial defence forces. The
regular forces could deploy to their wartime (GDP – General Defence
Plan) positions within 24 hours and full mobilization of reserves and
territorials would happen within 3-4 days.

After unification the *Heer* merged with the *Nationale Volksarmee* of
the former East Germany, forming a IV Corps headquartered in Potsdam,
starting in 1990. Between 1990 and 1994 this fourth Corps was reduced in
size until it was replaced in the Berlin/Potsdam area by III Corps. Very
little former East German equipment was held, most of it was sold to
finance unification. Since the bulk of both armies were conscripts,
reduction of the total strength was simply a management issue.
Historically however, over this time the structure and size of the
*Heer* changed significantly between 1993 and 1996 – these changes did
not happen.

[**Leopard
II**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/West_Germany/Leopard-2.php)

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image2.png" style="width:4.47917in;height:2.5in" />Considered
by many to be the finest tank in the world with a 120mm L44 smoothbore
gun, a speed of 68 KPH, an operational range of 550Km with internal fuel
and excellent armor protection. This tank is at least on par with the
British Challenger 2, French Leclerc or the American Abrams. By 1994 the
full production run of 2,125 was complete, and retained by the *Heer*.
None of the engineering variants of the Leopard 2 had reached production
but the Armored recovery vehicle variant was starting to arrive in units
by 1994. Leopard I specialist variants were used instead.

[**Leopard
I**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/West_Germany/Leopard-I.php)

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image3.jpg" style="width:3.51042in;height:2.34375in" />
The Leopard I was used widely throughout Europe and Canada as well. The
German Army operated a total of 2,437 of them. With the introduction of
the Leopard II, some were put into storage but most replaced M48s in
reserve units. 1,225 tanks were upgraded to the ultimate ‘A5’ standard,
while 250 were ‘A4’ versions, 110 were ‘A3’, 232 were ‘A2’ and the
remainder were upgraded to the improved Leopard 1 A1A1 standard. In
addition to the original production were large numbers of specialist
vehicles such as:

-   377x Gepard Anti-Aircraft variants;

-   105x Biber Bridge Layers;

-   444x Bergepanzer 2 Armored Recovery Vehicles (ARV);

-   36x Bergepanzer 2A1 ARV for engineer vehicles;

-   140x Badger Engineering vehicles;

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image4.jpeg" style="width:4.89583in;height:3.31653in" />

Gepard

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image5.jpeg" style="width:4.90385in;height:3.1875in" />

Biber Bridge Layer

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image6.jpg" style="width:5.44792in;height:3.79194in" />

Bergepanzer ARV

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image7.jpg" style="width:5.52083in;height:3.68056in" />

Badger

[**Luchs Armored Reconnaissance
Vehicle**](http://www.military-today.com/apc/luchs.htm)

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image8.png" style="width:5.08333in;height:3.29779in" />

The German Army used 408 of these 8-wheeled amphibious vehicles in their
reconnaissance battalions. With 8-wheel drive and all wheel steering,
being equipped with thermal sites, a 20mm cannon and long range radios,
it was ideal for the job it was tasked for. It had two driving positions
for rapid reverse.

[**Marder IFV**](http://www.military-today.com/apc/marder.htm)

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image9.jpg" style="width:6.25in;height:3.92708in" />

Germany was the first NATO country to adopt the IFV (Infantry Fighting
Vehicle) concept with the Marder. 2,133 of these vehicles were used in
Panzergrenadiere units. In addition to the 20mm Cannon and the Milan
ATGM (Anti Tank Guided Missile), the soldiers in the passenger
compartment can engage targets from inside the vehicle or quickly
dismount and assault. The Marder can carry 12 infantrymen but normally
carried a crew of 3 with 7 dismountable soldiers as passengers.

**M113 Family**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image10.jpg" style="width:5.09375in;height:3.39512in" />

More than 4,000 of the ubiquitous M113 were in use, in addition to
thousands used as infantry carriers’ numerous variants are found in the
German Army, including:

-   +220x M577 Command Post;

-   +500x Panzermorser 120 – 120mm Self Propelled Mortar;

-   154x Artillery Fire Control variants;

-   320x Beobachtungs Panzer Artillery observation vehicles;

-   301x M548G Skorpion Minenwerfer, mobile mine dispenser;

-   Forward Air Controller variant;

-   Electronic Direction Finding variant;

-   Signals vehicle;

-   Ambulances;

-   Radar carriers;

-   Artillery locating Radar carrier;

[**Fuchs
Series**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/West_Germany/TPZ-Fuchs.php)

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image11.jpg" style="width:5.3125in;height:3.38997in" />

The Fuchs is a Six-wheeled Armored Personnel Carrier (APC). The German
*Heer* operated 1,040 of these vehicles in several variants. The basic
vehicle was an amphibious and designed to carry a crew of 2 with 10
passengers. Variants include:

-   550x Standard Fuchs 1;

-   87x Non amphibious versions with larger payload;

-   265x fitted with various mission kits;

-   140x NBC reconnaissance vehicles;

**Tank Destroyers**

Three types of tank destroyers were used by the German Army. The idea
was that these had the firepower of a tank but neither the
maneuverability nor the protection. By 1994 they didn’t have the
firepower either.

-   607x
    [Kanonenjagdpanzer](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/West_Germany/Kanonenjagdpanzer-90.php),
    with a 90mm gun;

-   316x [Jaguar
    1](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/West_Germany/Raketenjagdpanzer-I.php),
    a similar chassis with a HOT ATGM;

-   162x Jaguar 2, a Kanonenjagdpanzer with the gun replaced by a TOW2
    ATGM

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image12.jpg" style="width:5.94792in;height:2.51643in" />

Kanonenjagdpanzer

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image13.jpg" style="width:4.65625in;height:2.94896in" />

Jaguar 1

<img src="/assets\images\nato\de\army\media\image14.jpeg" style="width:4.35417in;height:3.06699in" />

Jaguar 2
