**Caribbean Fury \#3 – Rumble in the Jungle**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Sept 2020</u>**

It’s mid-Feb in the Caribbean, and the globe-spanning conflict continues
to evolve. After heavy fighting around Cuba, US forces are refocusing
towards Europe, but that doesn’t mean an end to the regional fighting.
Cuba and Venezuela may be down for the moment, but Honduras and
Nicaragua are still an active problem, and Belize is politically
unstable with an active insurgency ongoing. All of this has to be dealt
with in the next couple of days.

**THE SITUATION**

Aircraft on hand are reduced compared to a few days ago. No carriers, no
AWACs, and no high-level /assets are available. My main striking force
comes from two ANG fighter wings of F-4s and A-7s in mid Florida, plus a
mix of rag-tag elements (F-4s/16s/18s, A-4s, and Kfirs) in southern
Florida. Fortunately, I have enough tankers in the southern USA to get
my planes to their targets. There are also a scattering of units around
the Caribbean, including A-4s way over in Puerto Rico, a few F-16s and
OV-10s (and an AC-130!) down in the Canal zone, and some MPA and cargo
aircraft on various islands.

I’ve got four small task groups in the area, mostly of older second line
ships. My most capable unit is probably the Dale, a Leahy class cruiser
with powerful long-ranged SAMS, which is patrolling off Belize with the
British Westminster, a capable ASW ship with good close-range defenses.
Together, they make a very good pair. Further north, I have a very nice
ASW group of a Spruance and a pair of Knox, up near the strait between
Cuba and the mainland. Out in the Caribbean I have a creaky old Permit
sub, some Pegasus hydrofoils, and a trio of older NATO frigates, and
closer to the canal I have a four-ship of frigates and old destroyers
based around the little nuclear cruiser South Carolina.

The Brits have their own problems in Belize, where they’ve got a handful
of Harriers, a recce Canberra, a bunch of assorted transport
helicopters, and a reinforced battalion of ground troops, to face off
against several thousand angry rebels which are trying to over-run the
country. Fortunately, there are a number of additional troop formations
around the Caribbean which can be used as reinforcements for British
efforts to stabilize the country.

**THE PLAN**

We’ll start in the south, where orders go out to start loading up troops
on the islands and flying them over to Belize. Colombia has offered the
use of the airport on the Island of San Andres, off the coast of
Nicaragua, so my Puerto-Rican A-4s, OV-10s from the canal, and some
F-16s all the way from Florida are ordered to forward base there for
operations in the morning. TG South Carolina is directed to make full
speed towards the island, where it will patrol to provide close SAM
support in the event of any interference from Nicaragua. Meanwhile, the
F-16s from the canal zone will make immediate aggressive fighter sweeps
in the area, to bring the Nicaraguans to battle.

My other ships and subs will move in the general direction of Belize and
the north coast of Honduras, hunting for any of the enemy patrol boats
which are reported to be around. TG Dale will provide long-ranged SAM
support, interdicting any attacks between Honduras and Belize, while the
other two groups concentrate on sub-hunting. The Brits will start trying
to localize rebel positions in Belize, while refining their defensive
position around the capital city. I’d like to have more air-power
on-scene, but I’m very reluctant to put aircraft on the ground there in
the middle of an insurgency. Therefore, the assorted attack elements out
of southern Florida start ferrying down to base out of the Caymans,
where they can make attacks at daylight. It’s more flying, but it’s much
safer, with no risk of rebel saboteurs stuffing satchel charges up my
tailpipes. Meantime, the ANG squadrons begin prepping for an attack in
the morning. The F-4s will concentrate on knocking out Honduran
airbases, while the A-7s will provide ARM support and general ground
attack capability.

**PRE-DAWN OPERATIONS**

Initial fighter sweeps go well, and my southern F-16s are soon racking
up a pleasing score against the Nicaraguan MiG-21s, which are badly
outclassed in the dark against BVR and front-aspect missiles. They even
find some little Cessnas out on maritime patrol, which they are pleased
to add to their score. I don’t have many fighters immediately on hand
near Belize, and the Honduran F-5s start making threatening runs on my
MPA which are trying to hunt for patrol boats in the area. This is when
the Dale starts showing off, using the 100-mile range of its SM-2ERs to
knock them down with satisfying regularity. The F-5s don’t have any
countermeasures, so most shots are kills, and the captain is very proud
of his crew.

The Dale’s escort, the Westminster, also proves her worth when her sonar
picks up a suspect underwater contact amid the swarm of marine life in
the area. A couple of schools of fish had already received an ASROC
surprise (perhaps the captain of the Dale isn’t quite as calm and
composed as he seems), but this contact isn’t quite the same. A visit
from the Westminster’s helicopter confirms it as an active submarine,
and the pilots quickly sink it (a Kilo) in fine Royal Navy style.

Meanwhile, ELINT gear on the MPA has confirmed the presence of several
operating air search radars in enemy territory. We’ve been allocated
four TLAMs, and this seems like the perfect use for them, so the South
Carolina opens fire, getting four precise hits which greatly reduce the
enemy’s off-shore air surveillance capability.

At this point, it feels like we can be confident of superiority in the
air, but that turns out to be premature, and the Hondurans start trying
to push us around. The first sign comes with the detection of powerful
fighter radars coming from the direction of Soto Cano. These aren’t old
F-5s! They’re modern Flankers, presumably escaped from Cuba, and they’re
headed north, ahead of a pack of attack planes. My fighters are out of
position, away at tankers or refueling in the Caymans, and although they
turn and hurry back, they can’t get there in time. The Dale opens fire
again, but the agile Su-27s are well defended with jammers and chaff,
and one manages to evade the SAMs and shoot down one of my little BN-2Ts
which was out on a maritime patrol mission.

The Flankers can’t evade forever, and the Dale finally manages to hit
them both, before tearing up the attack planes. These turn out to be old
Super Mysteres and Aviojets, which are even more helpless than the F-5s,
and they get swatted down like target drones. When the crew finally
figure out what they’re shooting at they cease fire, to preserve the
remainder of their SAMs, and they let the first of our arriving fighters
kill off the last of the attack. All the same, it’s been a very good
performance, with about 20 kills for 32 shots, and a unit citation is
definitely warranted for the crew of the Dale. (Those SM-2ERs are
awesome. With one ship I can control the airspace 100 miles in all
directions, preying on distant patrols and anyone trying to travel at
fuel-efficient altitudes, disrupting strikes, and retaining good missile
performance out to 50 miles. It’s a shame the USN gave them up.)

**MORNING LIGHT**

Honduras tries again with a second raid on Belize shortly after dawn,
this time using more powerful MiG-23s, coming in at wavetop height where
the Dale can’t get at them. Fortunately, by this time my fighters are on
station, and, despite the Cub jamming in the background, the F-16s spot
them and pounce on them with salvoes of Sidewinders. The result is a
quick and efficient execution, and the F-16s fly back to Florida for
more missiles.

My own strikes are finally ready by now, and a powerful force of F-4s
comes flying south, refueling in the gap between Cuba and the mainland,
before continuing south towards Honduras. (The exclusion zone over Cuba
is a real constraint, and it must add a hundred miles to my flight path,
compared to simply overflying the island. Still, orders are orders, and
we must obey. Scuttlebutt is that they still haven’t found all the
SA-10s that were hidden in the Cuban hinterlands…) The Phantoms are
carrying GBU-15 glide bombs with heavy penetrator warheads, and they’re
accompanied by a strong escort of A-7s carrying Shrike anti-radar
missiles, plus some Phantoms with air-to-air missiles only.

The Hondurans try to interfere with some more Su-27s, but these are met
by such a barrage of Sparrows that they are blasted down before they can
attack. This lets my F-4s release their ordnance unmolested, and the
runways and taxiways of all four Honduran airbases are heavily cratered
without loss. My escorting A-7s had expected some sort of SAM or AAA
radar activity, but none was encountered, and all twelve of them took
their missiles home again. Twelve planes could have held a lot of ground
attack ordnance, so this was a significant misjudgment on my part. Of
course, if I hadn’t brought them it would have been wall-to-wall SAMs.

**DAYTIME IN BELIZE**

The British government is putting a lot of pressure on us to deal with
the insurgency, and they’ve issued a series of intelligence reports
about suspected rebel troop locations, rebel logistical activity, and
important infrastructure to be secured and protected with troops on the
ground. We’ve also started getting confused reports about a potential
hostage situation on the coast in the Placencia area.

My Harriers have been outfitted with recce pods, and they join the
Canberra to start making runs over areas of interest in Belize the
moment dawn breaks. There’s definitely something going on at the hostage
location, as someone down there takes a pot-shot at the passing Harrier
with MANPADS, and we also start finding indications of troop
concentrations and supply caches throughout the country.

The British start things off by helicopter landing strong troop
formations at several chokepoints in the north, and then, as more troops
arrive from the islands during the day, they start making landings
progressively further down the country. The helicopters don’t have all
the fun, and small RHIBS are also used to make landings at a few of the
closer coastal LZs. Some of the Lynxes, en-route to LZs in the west,
suddenly get shot at by more MANPADS, which reveals a series of large
troop concentrations encircling Belize City about 25 miles out.

A wave of A-7s arrive from Florida mid-morning, along with the lesser
attack aircraft that forward based to the Caymans, and they start
systematically bombing the troop formations and supply dumps. Cluster
bombs do tremendous damage to the enemy infantry, and Snakeyes work well
too. There’s sometimes return fire from SA-7s, but the little missiles
have a terrible hit rate and tiny warheads, and, fortunately, the few
that do hit only manage to cause damage. I’m generally pleased with the
way things are going, although an attempt by some A-7s to hit a supply
depot with 2,000lb Mk84s also wrecks the adjacent airport control tower,
which draws some unpleasant criticism. I hand those targets over to F-4s
with small Mk 82 LGBs, whose accurate impacts and reduced blast radius
cause less damage to the neighborhood.

Collateral damage is definitely a concern with the hostage situation on
the coast, since it looks like the MANPADS-rich enemy infantry is
clustered right around the building where the tourists are being held.
Attempts to attack with Maverick missiles have limited effectiveness,
only killing one or two of them, conventional bombing is out of the
question, and I’m reluctant to get into an infantry fight. But then one
of the planners points out that if the hostages are safely secured deep
inside the building, then they’re probably safe from small warheads. A
flight of A-7s is ordered to the area, and goes hurtling overhead at
minimum altitude, one on each side of the building, dumping full
warloads of cluster bombs on the concentrated infantry. When the storm
of small explosions is done the enemy infantry are dispersed, the
building is scuffed but intact, and my helicopters can land to rescue
the tearful hostages.

My AC-130 arrives in the early afternoon, flying up from the canal, and
begins ripping up the rebel truck traffic, as well as clearing away more
of the southern troop concentrations near the logistical hubs in the
south. Fighters use strafing and Mavericks to deal with rebel boat
traffic in Amatique Bay, and my small groups of attack planes reload in
Florida, and make follow-up attacks on rebel infantry. This all takes
time, and dusk is approaching before the occupation of the LZs is
complete.

The British are quite satisfied by the progress, but when I wear my NATO
hat, I realize that this ate up a lot of resources that could have been
spent on the war effort in Honduras and Nicaragua. Other than hitting
the Honduran runways, we’ve done little ground damage to them at all.

**WAR AT SEA**

Overnight MPA searches have revealed the presence of enemy patrol boats
in the region, with one cluster near Belize/Honduras, and another
cluster off the north coast of Nicaragua. While I could have my ships
engage with Harpoon, the missiles are probably worth more than the
little cannon-armed patrol boats are. Therefore, the Pegasus hydrofoils
are sent to engage the ones near Honduras, hoping to shoot them up
safely with their 76mm guns. Unfortunately, the sea state is so rough,
and the shooting is so bad, that the hit rates are awful. When my
hydrofoils finally get there in the morning it generally takes a full
magazine of shells to sink a single patrol boat. Frustrated, and running
low on fuel, the hydrofoils head to the Caymans for replenishment.

The remaining patrol boats are finally dealt with by aircraft.
Maverick-toting F-4s do an efficient job sinking the ones off Honduras,
as well as getting rid of the surface search radar on the little island
100 miles off the Honduran coast. The Puerto-Rican A-4s launch from San
Andres Island and beat up the Nicaraguan fleet and radars, before
turning to dump the majority of their iron bombs on the port and
airfield of Puerto Cabezas. It turns out the enemy are alert and ready,
and a storm of small-caliber AAA downs one of the A-4s, but that doesn’t
stop my pilots from wrecking the docks and the control tower.

Meanwhile, the Soviets are prowling beneath the waves, and TG Banckert
(the NATO 3-ship frigate patrol) is suddenly fired on in the mid
Caribbean! Torps are detected boring in at 50 kts, and it looks like
they’re headed for my little Floreal, the slowest of the three frigates.
My ships counterfire and turn to run, while both helicopters scramble
and dash towards the probable location of the sub. The Floreal makes a
hard turn to the north, hoping it can get out of the sensor cone of the
approaching torpedoes, because it sure as heck can’t outrun them.
Fortunately, it works (the heavyweight wake-homers don’t have a wire, so
they can’t be redirected), and the big torps go thundering by two and a
half miles away. Simultaneously, the helicopters are using a combination
of dipping sonar and sonobuoys to localize the sub, and they each get a
hit with a Mk 46, putting an end to the Victor.

**BRONCOS ATTACK!**

At noon we get an unusual message from high command. They want to stage
a daylight B-52 raid on Managua, in plain view at low altitude, to exert
political pressure on the regime. We could theoretically launch now and
get there before dusk, but that could be a suicide run, with
God-knows-what popping up to engage the plodding bombers. There’s a lot
of prep to be done first.

My F-16s from the Canal zone go probing towards the airport in Managua,
which provokes a swarm of cannon-armed MiG-17s to come streaming up to
fight. These get cheerfully slaughtered by the F-16s and some of the
Puerto-Rican A-4s, which then escort in a radar-carrying OV-10 to look
for ground units. Nothing turns up, and it flies back to the island, but
that prompts the other OV-10 pilots to start talking. If B-52s can
attack, why can’t they? Don’t they have bombs too? They can’t get to
Managua itself, but the two coastal airports are in reach. They know the
northern one at Puerto Cabezos is well guarded, but the smaller one down
south at Bluefields probably isn’t, and it’s only 125 miles away.
Attack! Diving down towards the waves, the four little planes push their
twin turboprops up to a blistering 220 kts, and hurtle in, silk scarves
freshly laundered for maximum effectiveness.

Well, Bluefields has plenty of AAA, and MANPADS, and, can you believe
it, a fully functional SA-6, and it all starts firing the moment the
OV-10s pull up to bombing height. Tracers and smoke trails are crossing
in all directions, and the Broncos start dumping their ordnance and
spraying rockets and cannons at whatever’s in front of them. The lead
drops everything on the control tower moments before he’s cut down by
23mm fire, while number two manages to shoot up an AAA site before
turning aside in a desperate maximum performance turn at wingtip height.
Three and four hurl everything at the terrifying sight of the SA-6
battery before hauling away to the north, the white-faced observers
craning around behind in time to see secondary explosions tear through
the SAM launchers.

When the wing commander finds out he starts ripping people up for such a
reckless and ill-prepared attack, with no attempt at reconnaissance or
support. The pilots can only shuffle their feet. How could they know the
only significant SAM in the entire theatre was there, at the smallest
airport of all?

**DUSK IN HONDURAS**

My second main attack of the day focuses on Honduras, attempting to
destroy as much infrastructure as possible, without any more diversions
to help out in Belize. Tankers bring in F-4s, armed with the Mk 84
version of GBUs and LGBs, followed three quarters of an hour later by
A-7s with Mk 84 iron bombs. The F-4s arrive as dusk is falling, and
smash hangars, control towers, and radars at the four Honduran airbases,
all while staying safely at high altitude. The A-7s arrive just after
dark, using their FLIR to target the three Honduran naval bases, before
moving on to continue pummeling the two airfields near the coast. These
low-level attacks draw some disorganized AAA fire, but, fortunately, not
enough to cause damage.

As the battering is ongoing, we get reports that the Honduran government
is fleeing to the presidential retreat near the Toncontin Airport, and
we’re authorized to use TLAMs to attack it. However, my A-7s which were
bombing the Caratasca naval base still have half their bomb-load on
board, and they’re significantly closer than my ships. Urgent radio
messages redirect them to the new target, and they use their night
vision and radar to find it and hit it in the dark.

As my aircraft fly back to their tankers our intel starts reporting a
complete governmental collapse in Honduras, and we’re ordered to
disengage and clear out. We’ll be keeping a watchful eye on the region,
but we don’t expect further hostilities for the moment. (I have to
wonder how much sooner this could have happened if I hadn’t diverted so
much effort to help out in Belize.)

**NIGHT-TIME PREP-WORK IN MANAGUA**

There’s one more major attack planned for the night, in preparation for
the B-52 raid on Managua tomorrow morning. I don’t want any chance of
fighters or SAMs popping up to interfere while the vulnerable bombers
are present, so the actual functional attack is going to happen tonight.

Six F-4s carrying GBUs with penetrator warheads will target the runways
and taxiways, while four more with heavy penetrator LGBs will hit the
hangars, radar, and control tower. Four A-7s will be on overwatch with
Shrikes, in case the Nicaraguans have another heavy SAM site, and then
another eight A-7s will perform the riskiest part of the strike, going
in low to find any enemy air-defenses with FLIR, and hit them with
cluster bombs. The strike requires two tankings on the way in, and one
on the way home, and we end up borrowing the B-52s’ tankers to help out.
Now that Honduras’ airspace is closed, we have to go around the country,
which adds an additional 110 miles to the trip each way, pushing strike
time back to nearly 1:00 AM.

The first part of the strike works perfectly, and the runways and
infrastructure are catered and put out of commission, without any
interference by fighters or SAMs. The second part doesn’t go as well.
The A-7s dive in, and despite their FLIRs they have the devil of a time
trying to find and engage the low-level air defences. They manage to
spot and bomb some of the AAA and MANPADS in the open land to the east
of the airport, but the defences hidden among the built-up terrain in
the west remain frustratingly elusive. By the time one A-7 is shot down
and two more are damaged it’s clear this is a bad decision, and the
attack waves off to return home. (In retrospect, I should probably have
brought in some of my F-16s with IR Mavericks, which seem to have
superior spotting ability, and could have hunted from a safe altitude.)

In practical military terms the Managua airbase is out of the fight, and
I really have no need for the B-52s. But politics is politics, and
diplomatic pressure comes from B-52s, not mysterious explosions in the
night. They’ll come in tomorrow morning, make their theatrical bomb run,
and hopefully get away with it.

**NICARAGUA BY DAY**

Daylight sees a bit more prep work around Managua, with an AC-130
arriving to try and spot the anti-aircraft defences lurking off the west
end of the Managua airfield. That doesn’t work, and eventually a pair of
F-18s arrive, and, using the IR sensors on the most modern Mavericks we
have at our disposal, they finally manage to spot the lurking
miscreants. Some accompanying flights of A-7s apply cluster bombs until
the problem goes away. They then repeat the process at the other
Nicaraguan airbases, working over the air defences and leaving the
airfields open to attack.

The B-52s arrive over Managua precisely at noon. The Managuans have
lined up their folding chairs by airfield fence, clapping politely as
each stately bomber makes its fly-by, and grumbling about ‘Charging $10
for an air-show hot-dog, it’s robbery I tell you, that’s what it is”. It
then takes them three hours to get out of the parking lot before they
can go home. Still, the State Department seems to be pleased.

In mid-afternoon another F-4 strike arrives from Florida, this time
carrying heavy penetrator LGBs, and heads for the Nicaraguan airbases,
where they strike ammo bunkers and buried fuel facilities. As the
strikes get underway, word comes in that the Nicaraguans are also
capitulating and orders come in to cease attacking them and leave their
airspace.

**CONCLUSION**

At this point Honduras and Nicaragua have both withdrawn from the
conflict. There are probably still rebels active in Belize, but vital
regions have been garrisoned with troops, and the situation seems to be
stabilizing. Now the ANG squadrons can have the pleasure of heading
overseas to face the Soviet juggernaut head on…

**Play Impressions**

There's an interesting resource allocation dynamic going on here. I
probably should have started out with massive focused attacks intended
to knock Honduras and Nicaragua out of the conflict as early as
possible, but I found that Belize kept sucking up more and more aircraft
on CAS and interdiction. Initially, most of the ANG A-7s and almost all
my small-unit aircraft from Key West were dedicated to anti-rebel
bombing runs, plus a number of ANG F-4s with small LGBs to hit supply
depots. Belize was acting like a magnet that kept trying to pull
resources away from larger war objectives. It took a conscious effort to
put things back on track again.
