**Northern Fury 9, Hold the Line**

**AAR By Joel Radunzel**

Post 1

It's day four of WWIII in 1994 and the Soviets are steamrolling south.
Over the past two days they have occupied and fortified Iceland and
landed a large force at Trondheim in Norway. The Russians have built up
significant air and air defense strength at Keflavik and in northern and
central Norway, complicating NATO attempts to keep the SLOCs open. One
of the reasons they were able to get so far so fast is that all of the
US carriers were out of position when the war began. Now the nearest
one, the USS *Enterprise*, which was rushed back into service after an
accelerated overhaul and reactor refueling, is headed north protected by
two *Ticonderoga* cruisers to try to hold the line north of the NATO
convoys starting to cross the Atlantic. Going north with only one
carrier at this point in the war is extremely hazardous, but the
Americans have no choice.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf9\nf9_jr\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.98611in" alt="A screenshot of a computer Description automatically generated with low confidence" />

Yesterday the two Soviet *Kuznetsov* CVBGs put in to Reykjavik and
Trondheim, respectively, to refuel and rearm. We have lost contact with
them, but all indications are that they are coming south. In addition,
dozens of Soviet submarines are headed for the GIUK gap *en route* to
interdict the vital SLOCs from North America to Europe, where the epic
battle for Germany is raging. Three convoys are currently at sea, two
composed of Naval Reserve Fleet RoRos carrying the complete equipment of
the US 24th Mechanized Infantry Division, followed by a third convoy
composed of merchantmen carrying more general supplies. Overhead, a
constant stream of Civil Reserve Air Fleet aircraft are ferrying men and
supplies to the front.

To protect these, we have the *Enterprise*, her escorts, and air wing,
supported by the British Tornados and AEW aircraft at RAF Lossiemouth in
Scotland. These have been reinforced by the American F-15Cs of the 493rd
TFS, recently withdrawn from Norway after helping to blunt the Soviet
aerial offensive there. Canadian fighters our of Gander and Goose Bay,
supported by tankers, are pulling CAP over the central north Atlantic,
and US Air National Guard F-16s are running a similar patrol over the
southern tip of Greenland. A squadron of Louisiana Air National Guard
F-15As are ferrying to Thule in northern Greenland, where the
southerners are sure to enjoy the balmy February weather.

Opposing us, the Soviets have ferried at least one regiment (40
aircraft) of Mig-29s fighters and another of Su-24 attack jets to
Iceland, which they have begun to fortify with significant SAM defenses
and at least a full airborne division. We can also expect to face 1-2
regiments of Soviet Long-Range Aviation bombers operating from the Kola
and North Norway. The Russians are supported by very potent jamming and
AEW resources, as they have been in the previous three days of fighting.
Taking these out and keeping the *Enterprise* group hidden will be vital
to NATO success.

We also have numerous subs, a mix of *Los Angeles*, *Permit*, and
*Trafalgar*s, screening north of the *Enterprise* and east of Iceland,
to hopefully thin the herd of Russian boats coming south. Finally, we
have are at least a dozen Soviet SSNs/SSGNs already in the north
Atlantic.

So, here we go...

Post 2

Dawn broke across the flight deck of USS *Enterprise* as the nuclear
carrier steamed northeast towards Iceland, surrounded by her escorts.
Overhead, pilots flying F/A-18 Hornets were aloft providing close-in CAP
for the formations, while farther forward a pair of Tomcat pilots
searched for threats to their airbase. The *Big E*’s CAG had ordered an
ES-3A shadow ELINT bird aloft at daybreak to sniff for the electronic
telltales of Soviet ships and aircraft. Two E-2 Hawkeyes were also aloft
over the formation, their radars radiating so that the ships below could
maintain electronic silence.

Very quickly the ES-3A’s crewmembers monitoring the aircraft’s sensors
began to detect the distinctive emanations of the search radars and
powerful jammers carried by Soviet Su-24 EW birds. Plotting the sources
of the Russians’ electronic noise over the next half hour, the American
airmen were able to deduce that the Soviets had thrown out a cordon of
the potent jammers arcing around the entire southern half of Iceland.
Now and there a return off of a Russian radar revealed that an unknown
number of Mig-29 fighters were lurking within the electronic noise as
well.

The previous four days of fighting had shown that the Soviet EW aircraft
could render the American AIM-7 Sparrow missiles, with which most of the
Enterprise’s F/A-18s and F-14s were armed, all but useless in long-range
engagements. Immediately the CAG aboard *Enterprise* began diagraming
out a plan to take down the Soviet jammers operating south and west of
the island. Above decks, six F/A-18Cs sat waiting, each armed with six
of the deadly AIM-120 AMRAAM missiles that had proved to be the allies’
best air-to-air weapons in aerial combat to date. Below on the hangar
deck, crews were loading big AIM-54 Phoenix missiles onto F-14s in
anticipation of having to counter a raid of Soviet missile-armed
bombers. The AIM-54s were potent missiles, with a range of nearly a
hundred miles, but trying to hit a nimble fighter with one was like
chasing a Ferrari with a school bus. These weapons would be saved to
defend against threats to the carrier itself.

Far to the east, north and west of Scotland, the sensors aboard the
British E-3D Sentry AWACS bird were feeding that aircraft’s technicians
the same story, except with an ominous twist. The AWACS’s crew were
zeroing in on a separate formation of recon birds, likely Tu-16Ls
emanating their own jamming signals, accompanied by one OECM aircraft,
transiting the gap between Iceland and the Faroes. The controllers
vectored one of the two teams of Tornadoes on CAP to strike out over the
ocean to try to intercept them before they could burst into the north
Atlantic in search of the convoys. Two more Tornadoes rolled down the
runway at Lossiemouth to replace them.

Far to the south, French Atlantique maritime patrol aircraft were rising
from western France and heading west to sanitize the sea lanes in front
of the foremost convoy, which was carrying advance elements of the US
24th Mech.

Back aboard *Enterprise*, two Sparrow-equipped F-14s lurched forward on
their catapults amid clouds of steam and wobbled into the sky while
their pilots set a course northeast towards the nearest Soviet Su-24 EW
aircraft. They proceeded under radio and radar silence, hoping to take
advantage of one thing the Soviets lacked so far, airborne radars.

Post 3

For the two Tomcat pilots, the most difficult part of their mission was
finding the Soviet EW Su-24. The Russian jets’ powerful jammers put out
an enormous amount of energy. The technician aboard the ES-3A near could
only give them fuzzy vectors to the jammers’ source through the
electronic haze. When the pilots reached the general area where the
enemy aircraft appeared to be circling, they began a long, banking turn,
sweeping the sky with their powerful cameras to find the lone Russian
snooper.

After several minutes of searching the back-seater on the lead F-14
spotted a dark shape in his TV scope. Zooming in, the dot resolved into
the distinctive boxy swing-wing shape of the Su-24, its pilot flying a
racetrack pattern, unaware of the danger he was in. The Americans
altered course to come up on the Russian’s tail. When close enough, the
lead Tomcat jock locked on to the twin-engine Soviet jet and sent a
Sidewinder missile straight into its left tailpipe. The Russian crew
never even knew they were under attack, but did manage to radio a
warning back to Keflavik as they craft spiraled towards the sea. The
Americans turned their big fighters east, heading towards the next Su-24
in the perimeter, due south of Iceland.

Relying on vectors still from the crew of the ES-3A, the two American
jets entered the general area where the next Su-24 was circling and
began another search. After several minutes they were unable to locate
the EW aircraft visually, so the lead pilot decided to take the risk of
activating his radar. His back seater did so, and immediately their
AWG-9 picked up the lone blip of a Su-24 to the east. Both Tomcat pilots
flipped on their afterburners and rocketed towards it.

As the American naval fighters neared missile range of the Su-24, the
tables suddenly turned. The lead Tomcat’s WSO had illuminated his radar
again to get a precise fix on the Russian EW aircraft. In doing so, he
had inadvertently given away his aircraft’s position to the technician
aboard the Su-24 who radioed the information to the pilots of four
Mig-29s circling nearby to the north. These turned south and
accelerated, illuminating their own radars in the process.

The Russian fighters were within fifteen miles of the Americans and on
their flank. They immediately launched missiles at the intruders,
forcing the F-14 pilots to jerk their aircraft into violent evasive
maneuvers, unable to fire back. The engagement was short. The agile
American fighters both evaded the incoming missiles while their prey,
the Su-24, fled east. The pilots of the short-legged Mig-29s had been
operating at the edge of their effective range and the short burst of
afterburner had exhausted their fuel reserves, forcing them to turn back
towards Keflavik after only one salvo of missiles. Now the Americans
turned and counterattacked, downing two of the fleeing Migs with a
volley of Sparrow missiles.

Having survived the ambush by the Soviet Migs, the American aviators
turned their radars east to locate their original target, the swing-wing
Sukoi trying to escape eastward. This they did quickly, and after a
short tail chase downed it with another pair of AIM-7s.

The crew aboard the ES-3A were already detecting the signatures of
Soviet replacement jammers taking off from Keflavik, as well as the
radar of an AEW Helix helicopter in the Denmark strait of the type
carried by Soviet carriers. More ominously, they were seeing
intermittent returns from multiple Tu-16L reconnaissance bombers
transiting the same area accompanied by an unidentified OECM platform.
These would be the responsibility of others, however. The two Tomcat
crews, short on both weapons and fuel and far from their base, turned
southwest and headed for the safety of the Enterprise.

Post 4

Far to the east, in the gap between Iceland and Scotland, things were
developing somewhat differently. Here the E-3D orbiting over Scotland
had early on detected several Tu-16Ls and an OECM platform on a course
to break into the North Atlantic. The technicians aboard the Sentry had
also detected the radar of two low-flying Beriev Be-12 ASW float planes.
The controllers aboard the AEW aircraft decided to vector two Tornadoes
from RAF Lossiemouth out to sea to try to intercept these snoopers. The
two interceptors, radars off, spread out until they were separated by
fifty miles and then swept west.

The RAF had decided to keep the American F-15Cs of the now-veteran 493rd
TFS in reserve at Lossiemouth. Now a draw upon those reserves began to
appear necessary. The controllers on the E-3 detected four dangerous
Su-27s approaching from the north from the direction of Bodo in Norway.
The previous days’ fighting around the Shetlands and Faroes had shown
these to be more than a match for the Sky Flash-armed Tornadoes. The
pilots of a pair of AMRAAM-armed Eagles taxied onto the runway and
rocketed into the sky, headed north.

Now the threats started to multiply. Two of the Tornado pilots on CAP
duty north of Scotland had been shifting west to try to get a shot at
one of recon birds shooting the gap. These had apparently come too
close, as several Mig-29s now lit off their radars from the direction of
Iceland. More troublingly, numerous Su-33s also illuminated their radars
to the west. Several minutes of analysis by the AWACS controllers
determined that these were headed east towards the CAP Tornadoes.

To the south, the two Tornado pilots sweeping west into the north
Atlantic had outrun the radar coverage of the E-3 and now had to rely on
increasingly vague directions from controllers who were tracking the
Soviet snoopers solely by the Russians’ own radar and jammer emissions.
After several minutes flying through where the Russian recon birds
should have been, the northernmost Tornado pilot decided to energize his
own radar to help his search.

The sensor quickly returned several low-flying contacts, helicopters,
meaning that a surface task force was nearby. This fact was confirmed
soon after when the Tornadoes RWR began beeping to tell the pilot that
he had been illuminated and locked on to by either a Kirov battlecruiser
or a more modern Slava-class cruiser. Either way, a missile was rising
from the threat to the north to meet him. The pilot turned south and
dove, turning off his radar as he did so. The shot had been made at
extreme range and the Soviet missile burned out before reaching the
British jet. The location of one of the Soviet carrier groups was now
approximately known by the pilot, who radioed the information to the
AWACS over Scotland.

Farther south the second Tornado fighter pilot decided to energize his
radar. His sensor illuminated a Beriev Be-12 ASW flying boat directly
ahead and low. The pilot dropped below the thin clouds to identify. Once
he did, the slow-moving Russian bird was downed by a single Sky Flash
into its flank which sent it cart wheeling into the ocean.

Back to the north and east the Soviet Su-33s were approaching the CAP to
the northwest of Scotland.

Post 5

The Soviet naval fighters southeast of Iceland were operating beyond the
radar detection range of the RAF’s E-3D over Scotland. As such, the
controllers new they were there based on intermittent detection of the
naval Flankers’ own radars. After a while these went silent as well. A
pair of American F-15s had been directed that way to intercept, but
these were operating under radar silence as well. Neither side’s pilots
knew where their opponents were.

After passing several dozen miles beyond the radar detection range of
the AWACS, the American pilots decided to energize their own radars.
What they saw when they did so was a shock. Eight Su-33s were all around
them, to the west, north, and south, heading east. The Russian aviators
were apparently as surprised as the Americans and were slow to respond.
The two veteran American Eagle jocks started locking up Russian fighters
and launching AMRAAMs as quickly as they could switch targets. Then,
with nearly a dozen missiles in the air radiating outward from the
American aircraft, the pilots turned east and kicked on their
afterburners, chased now by Soviet return fire.

The outnumbered Americans, having flailed around like a wolverine in a
chicken coop, were saved by the chaos of the engagement. Soviet missiles
went wild as the aircraft guiding them were destroyed by the AMRAAMs
snapshot by the American flyers. When the last missile exploded, the two
Americans were being pursued by only two surviving Su-33s. But between
them the two Americans possessed only one remaining AIM-120, and another
group of Soviet fighters were approaching fast from the west.

The Eagle pilots fled before their pursuers. The pilot carrying the one
remaining AMRAAM managed to bring his aircraft’s nose around and launch
his missile, having to brave and evade a Russian weapon in return, but
his gamble paid off with another Flanker going down in flames. However,
the Americans couldn’t stay on afterburner all the way back to Scotland.
Eventually they would have to slow, and then the second flight of Su-33s
would be upon them.

Suddenly, to the American pilots’ surprise, missile contrails flashed
overhead, going west. To the right, the pilots saw more contrails,
headed in the same direction. The AWACS informed them they could cut
their engines. Their support had arrived. Two more Eagles, supported by
four Tornadoes to the north who had been freed to come west when the
Su-27s over the Norwegian Sea had turned for home, filled the sky in
front of the onrushing Soviets with AMRAAM and Sky Flash missiles. The
Soviets twisted and dove to evade the weapons, but one after another the
broken shapes of robin-egg blue and grey-painted Russian fighters fell
from the sky after flying through the shrapnel thrown by the NATO
missiles.

When the sky cleared, only one Soviet fighter remained, escaping back
west on afterburner. In the running engagement the NATO pilots had
claimed fifteen Sukois, nearly half of a Soviet carrier’s air group. To
the southwest, however, the Soviets were exacting some measure of
revenge on the two snooping Tornadoes, exposed far out over the north
Atlantic.

Post 6

The British pilot on the north end of the two-ship sweep of Tornadoes
over the north Atlantic had been acting like a fox in a henhouse. He was
at the limit of his fuel endurance and decided to unload his long-range
Sky Flash missiles into the screen of Soviet ASW helicopters below him
before turning back. This he did, downing three before he was reduced to
just Sidewinders for armament. Then he and his wingman, fifty miles to
the south, turned back east for Scotland, skirting the last known
location of the Kirov/Slava contact to their left.

All was going well until four Su-33s, likely the CAP of the Soviet
carrier lurking to the north, lit off their radars ad rocketed south on
and intercept course with the Brit. His wingman turned north to support,
but both pilots were too far from base and too low on fuel to use
afterburners. Soon multiple missiles were inbound. The British pilot
evaded one, then a second, but a third blew the large tailfin off his
Tornado, sending the jet spiraling towards the sea.

The wingman, still possessing Sky Flash missiles, got some measure
revenge by downing one of the Su-33s while it was engaged with his
leader. The second Brit then had to turn and run. But he, too, couldn’t
go to afterburner to escape, and the Russians closed relentlessly on his
tail, finally sending two missiles into his tailpipes. That was the
unhappy end of the attempt to intercept the Soviet recon birds southeast
of Iceland.

Fortunately for NATO, these aircraft appeared to be screening ahead of a
task force rather than searching for targets in the Atlantic, as their
signatures began racetrack patters between Iceland and the Faroes. The
RAF commander at Lossiemouth, pleased with the attrition to the enemy
carrier’s air group, ordered two more flights of AMRAAM-armed F-15s
aloft to sweep towards the estimated position of the Soviet task force
in the hope of drawing out and destroying what remained of the Soviet
fighters.

Post 7

Under the sea, the captain of HMS *Talent*, a *Trafalgar*-class nuc
boat, was running his submarine deep to get into the Iceland-UK gap
ahead of the Soviet *Varyag* carrier group. He was late getting here,
having tarried in port so as to take on a load of six of the wonderful
new Spearfish torpedoes which were replacing the nearly useless
Tigerfish weapons. The new torps possessed a top speed of close to
eighty knots, far outpacing the pathetic 35 knot speed of the Tigerfish.

“Captain, sonar,” called the chief sonarman in the nearby sonar room.

The captain set down his lukewarm tea on his armrest and responded,
“What is it, Freddy.”

“We’ve got a faint contact, bearing about zero-three-zero...firming
up...it’s definitely a submarine, sir.”

“Helmsman, slow to five knots,” ordered the captain.

For the next several minutes *Talent*’s sonar crew firmed up the
contact. After about half an hour the sonarman reported, “Sir, it’s a
*Sierra*-class boat. She’s making about five knots, just below the
thermocline. If she maintains course and speed, she will pass us near to
starboard.”

The captain nodded, then altered his boat’s course slightly to port in a
bid to swing around the flank of the Russian.

While the submarines dueled under the sea, above the waters the flight
of F-15Cs from RAF Lossiemouth was playing ferret to the *Varyag*’s air
group. Already severely depleted by the early run-in with another pair
of American Eagles, the Soviet naval aviators were not eager to venture
out from the protective umbrella of their ship’s SAM envelope. But when
the American pilots dashed in and lofted a pair of AMRAAMs at the Soviet
helicopters patrolling the waters ahead of the Soviet carrier group, the
Su-33 pilots had no choice. Three of them turned south to pursue and
engage the Americans.

The Eagle jocks fled south, drawing the Russians away from their ships,
which the Americans still hadn’t managed to locate exactly. Then, when
the time was right, the two turned back into their pursuers. The Soviet
pilots launched their AA-10s at extreme range, forcing the Americans to
fly into the face of oncoming missiles to launch their more deadly but
shorter ranged AMRAAMs before turning away from the oncoming threat.

The opposing missiles passed each other, going in opposite directions.
The Russian pilots were at a disadvantage in that they had to keep their
radars pointed at the Americans to keep their targets illuminated, while
the Americans could open the range with their oncoming threats. The
American missiles arrived first, downing two of the three Russian
fighters, while the Americans easily evaded the less capable Soviet
missiles. They then turned and ruthlessly hunted down the lone fleeing
Russian, leaving no naval fighters above the *Varyag* group. The
Americans, still armed with several AMRAAMs, were ordered back east by
the Scotland AWACS to provide security for a Nimrod to definitively
locate the Soviet task force.

Back aboard HMS *Talent*, the captain had made his turn in onto the
starboard flank of the Soviet *Sierra*, which despite its slow speed had
apparently not heard the British boat. The captain intended to disabuse
him of his ignorance shortly.

Not only were the Spearfish torpedoes fast, they also outranged anything
carried by the Soviet sub. The captain ordered two of the weapons
launched but run above the layer so as to mask their sound from the
Russian. The tactic worked. At long range the Soviet sonar operators
failed to detect the two fish until it was too late. Both eighty knot
weapons dove through the thermocline and detonated against the Soviet
submarine, ripping gaping holes in its hull and sending it and its crew
to the bottom of the Faroes Gap.

Post 8

For a while now the aerial sparring between the two sides died down as
the Soviet naval air groups, what remained of them, retreated to their
carriers and the protection of the Soviet escorts’ SAMs to lick their
wounds and regroup. This allowed the CAG aboard the Enterprise to vector
the crew of a P-3, escorted by two F-14s, to reconnoiter the area where
he suspected to find the western-most Soviet task group with its
long-range radar. Simultaneously, two of the airborne F-15 pilots
escorted a British Nimrod to the area where the eastern Soviet carrier
group was expected. The crews on both aircraft soon detected the blips
on their radar scopes denoting the positions of the two Russian battle
groups.

As the reports came into the Enterprise’s CIC, the picture began to
become clear for the American carrier group’s commander. The western
Soviet group, likely centered on the carrier *Kuznetsov*, was thundering
south through the Denmark Strait at 18 knots, while the eastern group,
likely headed by the carrier *Varyag*, was pushing southwest past the
southeastern coast of Scotland on a course that would combine the two
Soviet groups in the coming days if maintained. More troublingly, they
would both converge approximately on the location of the *Enterprise*’s
patrol area, possibly overwhelming the American task force.

The American commander did not wish to risk his ships, and especially
his carrier, the only one available in the North Atlantic for at least a
couple of days, in a missile exchange with the more numerous Russian
ships, particularly if they were supported by missile-armed bombers, as
they were sure to be once the American commander was forced to reveal
his ships’ location. His first inclination was to launch an alpha strike
on the nearer *Kuznetsov* group. The anti-surface strike package was
already readying in the hanger deck, but the task group commander was
concerned about the weight of the strike. Even with jamming support from
his embarked EA-6B Prowlers, would it be enough to overwhelm the
defenses of the Soviet group, which he knew by now consisted of at least
one *Sovremeny*-class destroyer, one *Slava*-class cruiser, and a
*Kirov* battlecruiser, as well as the *Kuznetsov*’s own formidable
defenses? And even if the attack succeeded, his planes would need time
to rearm for a second strike on the *Varyag* group.

The American commander considered his other /assets and decided on a
different course of action. He would turn his task force east, towards
the *Varyag*, and begin to close the range to that more distant threat.
Then he ordered an ELF message sent out to the three Los Angeles-class
submarines sweeping north into the Denmark strait, ordering their
captains to go deep and make speed runs to put themselves astride the
course of the *Kuznetsov* group. The commander hoped at the very least
that these potent subs would be able to take a bite out of the Soviet
carrier’s escorts, if not sink the flattop themselves. If they
succeeded, then the *Enterprise*’s commander would be free to
concentrate his entire air group against the *Varyag*, hopefully
smashing both Soviet carriers in the course of a day.

Over the next several minutes, the captains of the American submarines
*Portsmouth*, *San Juan*, and *Chicago*, received and acknowledged their
orders, altering course for the Soviet task group. Aboard the American
boats, excitement swelled as each captain announced to the crew that
they would be hunting big game in a few hours.

Back aboard the *Enterprise*, the task group commander knew that he
would need to thin the Russians’ ASW screen if his own submarines were
to have a chance at penetrating to the capital ships in the center. That
meant knocking down the helicopters that would be swarming out ahead of
the Soviet task group. The crews of these aircraft had proved to be
distressingly effective at hunting down NATO submarines trying to
penetrate the various Soviet task groups that had been transiting the
Barents and Norwegian seas over the past several days. The commander
wanted them eliminated, and his CAG had the plan to do it, a plan that
would not only eliminate the ASW helos but might also draw out much of
the remaining *Kuznetsov* Su-33s where they could be destroyed.

Post 9

While the CAG worked to put his plan to sweep aside the Soviet’s aerial
ASW screen aside, encouraging news arrived on the *Enterprise* from 2nd
Fleet HQ. A squadron of upgraded F/A-18Cs capable of employing the
AIM-120 missile was being made available to the Enterprise group. The
squadron was at Naval Air Station Norfolk and would need to make a long
flight up the east coast of North America, including two air-to-air
refueling, but once onboard they would triple the number of aircraft on
the American carrier that could carry the potent missile. The air staff
went to work coordinating the long ferry mission.

In the meantime, the *Enterprise*’s air group went to work stripping the
*Kuznetsov* task group of its aerial eyes. Two flights of F-14s
approached the Russian battle group from the south. Once they were in
range, the pilots all lofted a single Sparrow missile towards the flock
of Ka-27 helicopters that were patrolling the waters in front of the
oncoming Soviet ships. One tandem-rotor aircraft after another exploded
and fell into the sea.

The maneuver was not without risk for the Tomcats, however. To keep
their radars pointed at the Soviet helicopters long enough for the
semi-active homing Sparrows to strike their targets, the American pilots
had to fly into the SAM envelope of the Soviet ships, then turn away and
rocket out of range once their target was destroyed or the AIM-7 missed.
This game of cat and mouse continued, with the F-14 pilots dashing in to
knock down a Russian ASW helicopter, then being chased back out again by
SA-N-6 missiles launched by the *Kirov* and *Slava* cruisers at the
center of the formation. After several rounds of this, the Soviets had
had enough. The Russian task group commander ordered six of his
remaining Su-33s south in pursuit of the American raiders.

The F-14 pilots, warned by the controllers in the E-2C monitoring the
battle, turned their noses south and fled. Most had expended the
majority of their long-ranged Sparrows, and besides, experience over the
past few days had taught the NATO air forces to be wary of taking on
Soviet high-performance fighters with the disappointing AIM-7. They
instead turned on their afterburners and ran.

The Russian flyers, enraged at the cold-blooded destruction of their
helicopter air group by the Americans, pressed their pursuit hard,
trying to claw enough range on the Americans to launch their own
response. They rocketed south as well, and flew right into the teeth of
the Enterprise CAG’s trap.

All six of the *Enterprise*’s AMRAAM-capable F/A-18C pilots, flying
abreast, lit off their radars simultaneously and volleyed of their
missiles, two per approaching Russian. The Soviet pilots, faced with an
impossible situation, tried desperately to evade. For four of them, the
effort was futile. The surviving two, with the tables now turned, turned
back north and fled before the oncoming American Hornets, trying
desperately to gain the safety of their task group. They succeeded, but
now the F-14s returned to continue sniping at any Soviet helicopter
whose pilot dared to lift his craft off the ship’s deck. *Kuznetsov*’s
air group was being reduced to impotence, and to the south three
American submarines were gathering.

Post 10

While *Enterprise*’s air group was picking apart the *Kuznetsov*’s ASW
screen, far to the south, tragedy struck. The fast transports of the
Naval Reserve cargo ships carrying the equipment of the 24th Mechanized
Infantry Division had been crossing the Atlantic with no escort but two
antiquated reserve warships. They had been relying on speed for
protection, but as bad luck would have it a Soviet *Victor II* submarine
happened to be astride the convoy’s course. The Russian skipper had
unknowingly evaded the P-3 patrolling ahead of the American convoy and
worked his way in close. Just after the American patrol aircraft left
station for lack of fuel, the aggressive Russian put two spreads of
torpedoes into the big transports, sinking several as well one of the
escorting frigates before disappearing into the depths. Much of the
equipment for an entire American mechanized division, meant to reinforce
the epic battle now occurring in central Europe, was settling to the
bottom of the Atlantic. The Americans would get some manner of vengeance
a few hours later, however, when the submarine USS *Sturgeon*, ordered
into the area to hunt the Russian, tracked, and eventually sank the
enemy boat without even drawing a counterattack.

Far the east, the Russians attempted to make life difficult for the RAF
defenders of Scotland. A flight of six Su-27s tangled with the RAF’s CAP
of four Tornadoes. The Brits held their own long enough for a flight of
AMRAAM-armed F-15s from the 493rd to reinforce and drive the Russians
away, trading one Tornado for three Flankers. With the Soviet thrust
defeated, the F-15 pilots vectored into the Iceland gap to squeeze the
shoulder of the Soviet breakout into the Atlantic. The maneuver worked,
as the Eagle driver pounced on and annihilated a flight of four Tu-16
bombers, three configured for recon and one for EW.

With the 24th ID convoy under attack and *Enterprise*’s airborne
fighters busy splashing Soviet ASW helicopters, a new and unexpected
threat developed, this time to the stream of CRAF airliners carrying
soldiers and supplies across the Atlantic to Europe, as well as
dependents and casualties in the opposite direction. During the day
Soviet Mig-31 interceptor pilots had been testing the seam between the
radar coverage provided by Enterprise E-2C Hawkeyes and the E-3 Sentries
operating out of Scotland. A rotating patrol of Canadian CF-18s,
supported by tankers, was covering the gap by operating out of Goose Bay
in Newfoundland. So far these had been able to turn back the Soviet
probes, but they lacked direction from airborne radar and were exposed
over the middle of the ocean.

Enterprise’s CAG had just made the decision to shift one of his precious
E-2s east to cover the gap until an E-3 from Gander came on station.
Just then, the technicians aboard the E-2C reported a large formation of
contacts taking off from Keflavik, headed south. They immediately
vectored the patrols harassing the Soviet ASW screen on an intercept
course to the southeast. However, these flights were short of ordnance,
some were short of fuel, and they would need to punch it to intercept
the Russians before they were in the CRAF stream. The Hawkeye’s radar
operators tallied a dozen bogeys headed south before the Russians passed
out of detection range. The CAG ordered his ready fighters launched and
then vectored his CAP eastward as well. Every second would count in this
race.

The two Canadian CF-18 pilots on patrol, informed of the threat by the
Americans, tanked up from the accompanying Stratotanker and then
vectored northward. They would need to use their own radars to locate
the Russians, but they knew where to look. At this range from Iceland
the Soviets wouldn’t have the fuel to try anything pretty. On the other
hand, the two Canadians were carrying only four AIM-7s and four AIM-9s
between them for this long range patrol, and they would be outnumbered
six to one until the Americans arrived.

Both Canadians, after flying north for what the controllers on the E-2
judged to be a sufficient amount of time, energized their radars in
unison. They immediately detected the massed Soviet formation directly
ahead. The pilots split up, one turning east and the other west, before
turning back to engage the oncoming Russians from an oblique angle
rather than straight on. The flight leader judged that the Russians
didn’t have the fuel to both chase his jets and cut the aerial bridge.
He intended to force them to choose.

As the two pilots turned back towards the Russians, each selected one of
the enemy contacts, locked onto it, and loosed a Sparrow missile at
maximum range. Both missiles flew true, exploding and sending shrapnel
into the path of two of the Soviet jets. Five to one, though the flight
leader. Now the Canadians each selected a second target and fired their
last remaining AIM-7s. By now the Russians were wise to the attack and
had activated their own radars, identifying their aircraft as Mig-29s.
The Russian pilots evaded the second attack, spoofing the Sparrow
missiles with chaff and jinking maneuvers. The Canadians were down to
Sidewinders as they pressed into the flanks of the Russian formation,
who barely paused in their southward lunge.

The Soviet pilots had not anticipated such an aggressive attack from
pilots who were so outnumbered, and as the Canadians anticipated they
did not have the fuel for a dogfight. AIM-9s flashed into the Russian
formation, downing two more of the Migs. Four to one, but now the
Canadians were out of missiles. On top of that, one of the CF-18s had
caught a Soviet short-range air-to-air missile as its pilot flew through
the Soviet formation. Now the odds went down again. Eight to one, and
the Canadian flight leader was down to guns.

The NATO pilot looped around to get on the tail of the Russian raiders.
He hid himself in the clouds until he was close, then popped up beneath
the trailing Russians and loosed a burst of 20mm fire into the belly of
a Mig. The Russian jet exploded, then the flight leader shredded
another. But now he was completely out of ammunition. “What do I do
now?” He thought. “Ram them?” He was about to do just that when he saw
puffs of explosions begin to appear in and among the surviving Migs to
his front.

The over his radio he heard an American accent say, “Go ahead and back
off, Canuck. We’ve got this now. Good work!”

American F-18s and F-14s, arriving in staggered order, shredded the six
surviving Russians with a mix AMRAAMs and AIM-7s. The last Soviet pilot
died less than a hundred miles north of the oblivious CRAF flights. The
aerial LOCs were safe, for now.

Post 11

With the Soviet attempt to disrupt the air bridge to Europe defeated and
the ASW helicopter screen ahead to the westernmost advancing Soviet
carrier group swept aside, the drama of the afternoon turned towards the
attack runs being made by the three American 688-class attack boats on
the Soviet task group. The first to approach the Soviet task group was
USS *San Juan*. This sub was also the newest of the trio of boats
vectored towards the Soviet ships.

The *San Juan*’s captain had maneuvered her via a high speed run so that
his boat was now astride the projected course of the Soviet carrier
group. Now he ordered his helm to slow to five knots and ascended to
communications depth. The communication mast raised, and the comm techs
immediately reported numerous messages and broadcasts from the P-3
shadowing the Soviet formations, giving the exact position and formation
of its ships. Two DDGs were leading the group, though the patrol
aircraft had not as yet been able to identify their type. The captain
judged that at least one was likely a dangerous *Udaloy*. His plan of
attack called for thinning the Soviet escorts with his four Harpoon
missiles before attempting to penetrate the formation. As his boat was
now within range of the oncoming Soviets, the captain judged now a good
time to commence his attack.

In quick succession, four missile canisters ejected from *San Juan*’s
torpedo tubes and broached the surface. The Harpoons’ rocket motors
ignited and sent the weapons streaking northward into the arctic dusk.
*San Juan*’s captain kept his boat shallow so his ESM mast could collect
data if and when the Soviets lit off their radars. He had targeted all
four of his missiles on the escort in the southeast corner of the
formation, which was composed of four destroyers in a box around three
larger ships. The Soviets were operating under EMCON, which made them
difficult to identify but also precluded their early detection of the
inbound weapons. Their early warning was to have been provided by their
AEW helos, which were now doing good impressions of an artificial reef
at the bottom of the Denmark strait. Stripped of his airborne sensors,
the Soviet task force commander had clung to the idea too long that
radar silence offered him anonymity.

The first warning the Russians had that they were under attack came when
the first of the Harpoons flew to the end of its vector and activated
its radar seeker. The three training weapons followed suit. They quickly
acquired the destroyer directly in their path, right where it was
supposed to be, and made slight adjustments as they maintained their
wave top altitude above the dark, choppy waters. The Soviet crews
reacted quickly, as in seconds every radar in the formation was
radiating. Back aboard *San Juan*, the ESM techs quickly identified the
targeted ship as an *Udaloy*. The *San Juan*’s captain swore as the
other lead ship was identified as a far more dangerous *Udaoy II*. These
were trailed by a *Slava*, a *Kirov*, and the *Kuznetsov* at the center
of the formation, which were in turn trailed by two more destroyers that
appeared to be *Sovremeny*s. A powerful formation indeed, the captain
though. *Enterprise*’s and the P-3s’ sensors had all noted the same
information.

The Soviet defenses did their best in the little time they had. The lead
Harpoon was shattered by a SAM launched from the targeted *Udaloy*, the
*Admiral Kharlamov*. The next weapon flew through a cloud of chaff
ejected by the target and impacted into the sea beyond. But the third
and fourth missiles struck home, one striking the ship’s bow, causing
major flooding. The other hit and blew apart one of the Admiral
Kharlamov’s two quad-box launchers for the ship’s *Metel* ASW missiles,
causing extensive shrapnel damage to the superstructure.

*Admiral Kharlamov*’s captain immediately ordered his ship to slow to
three knots, both to limit the flooding to his ship’s forward
compartments from the hole in the bow and to slow the winds that were
fanning flames from the second hit. Medics arrived on the bridge to care
for several sailors who had been struck by shrapnel and debris from the
second Harpoon. After several minutes the captain was confident that he
would be able to manage the fires, but some testing showed that he could
not go above five knots without the flooding in the bow becoming
intolerable.

On *Kuznetzov*, the task group commander made the decision to slow the
entire formation. *Admiral Kharlamov* could still fight. But of greater
import, when the formations’ radars had energized the extremely
long-range surface search set on *Slava* had returned numerous surface
contacts due south, at the extreme end of the sensor’s detection range.
This, the Soviet admiral knew, could only be the Americans’ *Enterprise*
group, coming north to block the Soviet thrust at the SLOCs. This was
priority intelligence for Red Banner Northern Fleet, and the Soviet
commander radioed a contact report back to Murmansk. In minutes, Tu-22Ms
from northern Russia were vectoring towards tankers north of Iceland,
and pilots ran through the bitter wind towards missile-laden Su-24
attack jets, which had been kept ready at Keflavik for just this
opportunity. Back aboard the Russian ships, crews readied their task
group’s impressive arsenal of big *Bazalt* and *Granit* anti-ship
missiles, called SS-N-12 Sandbox and SS-N-19 Shipwreck by the NATO
navies. This would be the Soviets’ best opportunity so far to overwhelm
the defenses of an American battle group with a coordinated strike of
sea and air-launched missiles.

Post 12

The crew aboard the P-3 shadowing the Soviet formation had noted the
slowdown of the Soviet ships and correctly surmised that the southeast
destroyer, now known to be an *Udaloy I*, had sustained some damage. The
Soviets were still coming south, but now at a pace of just four knots.
While the damage to the Russian ship was good news, the slower pace of
the Soviet advance would be problematic, as it would improve Soviet
sonar performance while the three American submarines approached. Aboard
the *Enterprise*, where the American commander was trying to husband his
aircraft for a strike on the *Varyag* group to the east, began to
explore his options to force the Soviets to speed up again. For
starters, he ordered his battle group to turn southeast, away from the
oncoming Russians.

The captain of USS *San Juan*, noted the types of Russian ships in the
formation to the north based on his boat’s ESM mast reading. After
receiving an update on the Soviets’ range and course from the P-3’s
crew, the captain took his boat deep and proceeded north, aiming for the
weak point in the Soviet escort screen held by the damaged *Udaloy*.

To the southwest, the captain of USS *Providence* was bringing his
submarine to communication depth to receive the targeting data for his
boat’s missile attack on the Soviet task group. With the update on the
locations of the Soviet ships, the commander ordered his four Harpoons
launched on a vector for the *Udaloy II* at the southwest corner of the
Russian formation. Four more missiles broached the surface of the choppy
Denmark Strait, ignited, and settled into their sea-skimming flight
profiles, heading northeast.

The Russians had once again turned off their radars in a vain attempt to
confuse targeting for further missile attacks. All this accomplished was
to once again reduce their response time for this new attack. Once
again, the Soviets first warning was the activated radar seekers on the
incoming weapons. This time, however, their defenses proved more
effective.

The target of Providence’s attack had been the *Udaloy II*-class
destroyer *Admiral Chabanenko*. This new ship, with better sensors and
fire control, quickly activated its radars. SA-N-9 missiles streaked
outward towards the oncoming threats, knocking down two of the Harpoons.
The other two were engaged and destroyed by the destroyer’s 30mm CIWS
before they could close enough even to do any damage. Providence’s
attack had failed to do any damage to the Soviet ships and had instead
only alerted the Russians to the probable presence of a second NATO
submarine. Providence’s captain took his boat deep and turned east,
planning to intercept the Soviet ships as they continued south.

Now the captain of USS *Chicago*, approaching from the southeast, took
his turn to launch Harpoons at the Soviets. His weapons streaked in
towards the damaged Admiral Kharlamov. The Russians, alerted by the
earlier attacks, reacted well, but not well enough. One missile slammed
into the destroyer’s flank and exploded in the engine room, leaving the
ship dead in the water. That was enough for the Soviet task force
commander. He ordered his ships’ missiles launched toward the American
formation far to the south. *Granit* missiles exploded from their
launchers, heading south, while the older supersonic *Bazalt* missiles
arced upwards in their supersonic trajectories.

The controllers on the orbiting E-2C, who were also now tracking the
Russian ships, detected the threats as soon as they were launched.
Perhaps more troubling, they also detected a large formation of aircraft
approaching from the northeast, from the direction of Iceland...

Post 13

The missiles launched from the Soviet carrier group came on, the
*Granit* missiles skimming the wave tops while *Bazalts* flew in a
supersonic arc. They would take several minutes to enter the engagement
envelope of *Enterprise*’s escorts. The American carrier’s CAG ordered
the airborne CAP north to try to thin the *Granits*, which were coming
on in a long stream, as fast as they could be launched by the crews of
*Slava*, *Kuznetsov*, and the *Kirov*-class battlecruiser *Kalinin*. The
*Bazalts* would have to be engaged by the Aegis systems aboard the
*Ticonderoga*-class cruisers USS *Cowpens* and USS *Anzio*.

While the E-2C’s techs tracked the southward progress of the Soviet
missiles, onboard *Enterprise* the ready fighter, six F-14Ds with a
heavy load of AIM-54 Phoenix missiles taxied into the catapult and
roared skyward into the darkening sky, their tailpipes glowing blue. The
CAG vectored them to the northeast, towards the twenty-four bogeys
approaching from Iceland. The deck crew on *Big E* scrambled to get more
fighters, F-18s and F-14s, into the sky as quickly as possible. To the
west of the formation, the flights that had completed the destruction of
the Mig-29 raid on the ALOCs were returning. They were low on weapons,
and several were low on fuel, but they increased speed to try to
interpose themselves between their ship and the oncoming raid.

As the *Bazalt*s nosed down and closed to within range of the SM-2MR
Block II and Block III missiles aboard the Aegis cruisers, the crews of
both ships energized their powerful AN/SPY-1 radars and began tracking
the threats for themselves, no longer relying on the information
second-hand. Both captains ordered their systems set to automatic, and
in moments missiles were erupting out of both ships VLS cells, leaving
long fiery trails in the arctic dusk.

As the SM-2MRs climbed, the pilots of the four fighters of the
*Enterprise* CAP dove onto the sea-skimming Granits. Each pilot engaged
with his long-range Sparrows first. The AIM-7s, which had proved such
poor weapons to date against the nimble Soviet fighters, proved very
adept at knocking down the big SS-N-19s which flew straight and level
above the choppy waves. Nearly every one hit. The disadvantage for the
American pilots was that they could only engage one target at a time,
which meant that by the time they were engaging their third target with
a Sparrow they were also maneuvering to engage closer targets with their
short-range AIM-9s. Two of the pilots even used their cannons to destroy
a missile before the stream of Soviet weapons flashed past, and the
Americans broke right and left to clear the airspace for the Aegis
system to engage low as well as high.

Far above the US CAP, SM-2s were exploding into the paths of the
incoming SS-N-12s, knocking them down with great regularity. Rarely did
one of the Soviet missiles require a reengagement, and those that did
never needed a third treatment. In a few short minutes the sky was clear
of the older Russian missiles, and *Cowpens* and *Anzio* were free to
focus their attention on the remaining sea-skimming *Granit*s, which
were just now beginning to appear on the ships’ radar screens due to
their low altitude.

Farther to the northeast, the pilots of the ready F-14Ds, loaded for
bear with Phoenix and Sparrow missiles, were coming within range of the
large Russian raid from Iceland. The big AIM-54s began to drop from the
Tomcats’ bellies, ignite, and accelerate into a Mach 5 arc towards the
enemy aircraft. In minutes the six Tomcat drivers had launched all of
their AIM-54s and now closed to Sparrow range.

The big American missiles tore into the Soviet formation, composed of a
regiment of Su-24 attack jets. The Russian’s did what they could to
evade, but their own heavy loads of AS-4 missiles limited their agility.
Yellow flames illuminated the cloud tops as one swing-wing jet after
another flew through a cloud of shrapnel. The Soviet pilots emerged from
the maelstrom with only half their numbers, screaming into their radios
for support from their own fighters. But the Mig-29s that were to have
escorted them had been thinned during the day by the American thrusts
towards the Soviet EW aircraft, and the remainder had been lost in the
ill-fated thrust towards the ALOCs. A pair of Mig-31s over central
Iceland did turn to engage, but they were still too far to pose a threat
to the Americans. The remainder of the Russian fighter jocks were
deciding that discretion was the better part of valor for this fight.

Now the Sparrow missiles arrived in the Russian formation from two
directions as the ready group from the *Enterprise* and those returning
from the ALOC fight converged on the bombers. The Americans were short
on AIM-7s, and they quickly closed to Sidewinder and even cannon range,
evading the ineffectual IR missiles launched by the Sukoi drivers in a
desperate attempt to defend themselves. In minutes it was over, the
Soviet raid annihilated before a single Fencer approached to within
missile range of the American battle group. The American fighters, low
on ammunition, turned back towards their carrier, now chased by the two
Mig-31s, but without conviction on the Russians’ part.

The missiles from *Cowpens* and *Anzio* were just splashing the last of
the *Granit*s at a comfortable range from the American ships when one
final threat developed. Four Tu-22M bombers, which had been circling
west of Iceland for just such an opportunity, had threaded the seam
between the Americans intercepting the Soviet surface groups’ missiles
and those destroying the Su-24 raid. Belatedly, the CAG vectored two of
his pilots who still had missiles to engage this new threat, but it was
too late. Eight missiles streaked towards the Enterprise as the
supersonic Russian bombers turned back to fly over Keflavik and the
safety of the SAM batteries there. A Tomcat driver managed to catch one
of the Soviets and bring the big swing-wing bomber down, but the other
three escaped.

*Anzio* and *Cowpens*’ Aegis systems easily dealt with this last threat,
but both cruisers’ magazines had been seriously depleted repelling the
complex attack. The CAG remarked that the squadron of AMRAAM-armed
Hornets inbound after a long flight from Norfolk couldn’t get there fast
enough.

Post 14

USS *San Juan*’s captain maneuvered his 688I-class boat towards the
southeast quadrant of the oncoming Soviet formation’s perimeter, towards
the corner where the *Udaloy* he had fired his Harpoons at would have
been. His sonar operators had heard two distant explosions from the
ship’s bearing, followed several minutes later by a third. He was
banking on the fact that the ship was well and gone. *San Juan*
proceeded north-northwest at a quiet five knots.

On the surface, the Soviets task group had completed taking the
survivors off of the sinking *Admiral Kharlamov* and were now proceeding
south at 18 knots again in an attempt to bring their shorter-ranged
SA-N-14 missiles into range of the American task force. The Soviet
commander knew it was a major risk, but with his air group destroyed and
*Varyag* still hours away, he saw little choice. *Kuznetsov* and her
consorts steamed on through the icy night.

Over the next hour USS *San Juan*’s captain was gratified to find his
supposition correct. He had put his boat through the gap in the
Russians’ ASW coverage. Past the outer screen, he approached the three
capital ships in the group’s center. He was just beginning to feel
confident when his sonar room excitedly reported a torpedo to port. The
sonar operators aboard *Admiral Chabanenko*, the *Udaloy II* to the
west, had caught a whiff of the *San Juan*’s reactor plant noises on
their towed array. *Kalinin*, at the center of the formation, had
launched a *Metel* ASW torpedo at the general area of the contact.

The torpedo was nearly three miles distant, no real threat to *San Juan*
as it circled in its search pattern, but the American captain knew that
the Russians were looking for him now. He increased speed to 20 knots
and attempted to break contact towards the Soviet ships, keeping his
boat deep. More torpedoes rained down from above, some closer, some
further away, until the American felt he had no choice but to launch his
fish at maximum range and break contact. The captain ordered four Mk48s
fired, two at the Slava to the west of Kuznetsov and two at the carrier.
The weapons shuddered out of their tubes and the torpedo room went
through the drill of reloading as their boat turned away to starboard.

Unfortunately, the attack had finally given the Russians the sonar fix
on the American boat they had been looking for. *Metel* torpedoes now
began to fall in the water with troubling accuracy. *San Juan* went to
full speed and evaded one, then another, but a third fired by *Kalinin*
splashed down broadside to the American boat and only a quarter mile
away. The Americans had no chance and the torpedo struck their boat
amidships, instantly flooding the control room and sending *San Juan*
and her crew to the bottom.

However, in their haste to destroy the American sub the Russians had
failed to detect the Mk48s, fired at long range but now speeding into
their attack runs as they acquired their targets. *Slava* attempted to
turn and run away from the fish, but this only exposed the cruiser’s
screws to the Mk48s’ big warheads, which exploded one after the other
beneath the warship. The first wrecked the *Slava*’s propulsion, the
second completely separated the fantail from the rest of the ship. The
big cruiser’s bow slowly lifted out of the water, then began to slide
backwards beneath the dark waves.

*Kuznetsov* was slower to turn that *Slava*, which meant she was
broadside to the American weapons when they struck, tearing to large
holes in the carrier’s flank. Seawater rushed in and *Kuznetsov* began
to take on a list, but heroic work by her damage control parties soon
brought the flooding under control. Soon, the big Soviet ship was
proceeding south once again, albeit at a much-reduced speed of four to
five knots. The Soviet commander, furious at his losses, was determined
to take some measure of revenge on the Americans in the absence of
orders from Red Banner Northern Fleet for him to withdraw his battered
force.

Post 15

The *Enterprise* task group’s commander had monitored the battle around
USS *San Juan* to the north, from the perspective of the crews aboard
his airborne E-2Cs who reported the launches of multiple SS-N-14
missiles followed by the disappearance of the contact marking the
position of the *Slava* and the slowing of the rest of the formation.
The commander assumed at least one other of the Soviet ships had
suffered damage, he hoped the *Kuznetsov*. Then *San Juan*’s rescue
beacon started transmitting.

The commander knew the next closest sub was one of the older *LA*-class
boats, USS *Portsmouth*. She would be trying to penetrate the formation
from the west, right past the dangerous *Udaloy II*. The commander was
willing to bet money that it had been that ship that had compromised the
*San Juan*. He needed to take the *Udaloy* out to give *Portsmouth* a
chance. He didn’t want to dilute the alpha strike readying in
Enterprise’s hangar bay by sending penny packets at individual Soviet
ships, but he only had one weapon in his task force that could reach the
Russians. The Spruance-class destroyer USS *Thorne* still carried eight
Tomahawk anti-ship missiles, some of the last ones in the fleet. With
precise targeting data on the Soviet ships provided by the E-2s, the
commander ordered *Thorne* to launch all of them.

The big Tomahawks roared out of the VLS cells on USS Thorne in long
fiery columns of smoke before tipping over one at a time and settling
into their flight northwards. The stream of missiles took nearly twenty
minutes to travel the nearly 200 miles between task forces. In the
darkness, the crew of the destroyer *Admiral Chabanenko* was slow to
detect the incoming threats, but when they did they reacted quickly,
launching SA-N-9 missiles and activating their CIWS systems. One
Tomahawk after another fell to the Soviet defenses until only two were
left. One of these was decoyed by a chaff rocket, but the last one flew
into the destroyer’s hull amidships and exploded.

The damage aboard the *Admiral Chabaneko* was terrible, but her crew
considered themselves to be elite and quickly brought the fires and
flooding under control, though the captain quickly learned that his ship
could barely make more than three knots without opening up more seams to
the sea. His weapons were better off, however, and so were his sensors.
His bow and towed array sonars were still functioning normally, and only
one CIWS array had been knocked off of its mounting. Even so, the
*Kuznetsov* task group was quickly being reduced to a formation of
cripples. The commander aboard the carrier radioed headquarters asking
for permission to withdraw, but received no response. That was when the
*Admiral Chabanenko*’s captain called, reporting a faint submerged
contact approaching from the west.

The Soviet technicians tracked the contact for nearly half an hour,
losing it more than once but then requiring it, always closer to the
task group. Growing impatient, the Soviet commander ordered *Kalinin* to
turn and start dropping *Metel* torpedoes in the vicinity of the contact
to flush out what he was sure was an American submarine.

Post 16

USS *Portsmouth*’s crew didn’t even know they had been detected until
the Russian weapons started dropping into the water, uncomfortably
close. The captain ordered evasive maneuvers and a snapshot of two
torpedoes towards the nearest destroyer, which he was tracking by the
noises emanating from its damaged hull. The enemy ship was still at long
range, but it was the only target within reach. The two Mk48s sped on
their way.

*Admiral Chabanenko*’s captain received the report of inbound torpedoes
with resignation. He could do nothing to evade with the shape his ship
was in. Instead he focused on feeding the best information he could to
the *Kalinin*’s captain, who continued to salvo off SS-N-14 missiles in
the Americans’ direction. After the fourth or fifth missile left
*Kalinin*’s canted tubes, *Chabanenko*’s captain was gratified to hear
his sonar operators announce an explosion on the American submarine’s
bearing, just before both American torpedoes detonated below his own
ship’s keel, breaking the destroyer’s back in two places and killing
much of the crew.

Aboard *Enterprise*, the task group commander noted with satisfaction
the disappearance of the contact marking the Russian *Udaloy*, then
swore as his communication officer reported that *Portsmouth*’s rescue
beacon was squawking. Two nuc boats in less than two hours! He might
have to divert an air strike towards the *Kuznetzov* after all.

Just then, explosions wracked both the *Kalinin* and the damaged
*Kuznetsov*, yellow flashes visible to the F-14s on CAP who had been
inching north as the Soviet screen was whittled down. On radar, the
technicians watched as the blip marking *Kalinin*’s position split in
two and then disappeared entirely, while the contact marking *Kuznetsov*
steadily grew more faint as the ship settled into the water, listing
heavily to port.

The sacrifice of *Portsmouth*’s crew had not been in vain. While the
Soviet defenses had concentrated on the older US submarine approaching
from the west, to the east USS *Chicago*’s captain had used the
opportunity to sneak his 688i boat to within close range of the Soviet
capital ships and fire a spread of Mk48s. The Soviets never heard
Chicago, whose captain took her deep and imitated a hole in the water
while his sonar techs listened to the death throes of the two ships
above them.

But *Chicago*’s work was not done yet. Soon her sonar room reported the
thrashing propellers of the two trailing *Sovremeny*-class destroyers.
Whether they were surging forward to counterattack or rescue survivors,
the *Chicago*’s captain did not know, and didn’t particularly care. He
slipped his own boat in between the advancing destroyers and ascended,
then when he was practically at point blank range fired two fish at each
Soviet ship. The Russians never even had a chance. All four Mk48s ran
true, and four powerful explosions reverberated through Chicago’s hull.

The American captain evaded again. He was a professional, after all. But
after several minutes he could not resist the temptation to come to
periscope depth and survey his work. Through the low-light periscope he
took in the sight. To the south, *Kalinin* was gone, and the port half
of *Kuznetsov*’s flight deck was awash, hundreds of sailors in life
vests congregating around inflatable life rafts that were being slid
into the water as the ship sank. To the east and west, both *Sovremeny*s
were sinking and burning, sailors jumping from the superstructures into
the icy water. Satisfied, the captain ordered a message sent to
*Enterprise* and anyone else who was listening.

It read: *Kuznetsov* and escorts annihilated. Go get *Varyag* for us.

Post 17

As the long night wore on, NATO forces scored more successes, and took
some losses. Down south along the SLOCs, French Atlantique patrol
aircraft detected and sank two soviet submarines attempting to intercept
the transiting convoys. Another Soviet submarine was detected by a P-3
along *Enterprise*’s eastward course. S-3 Vikings from the carrier took
over the prosecution and eventually sank a Russian *Sierra*-class boat.

In the air, the Americans began to press in onto the flanks of the
Soviet breach in the GIUK gap. The F-15 jocks of the 493rd Fighter
Squadron from Lossiemouth sent sweeps over the gap between Iceland and
Scotland, which the *Varyag* group had recently vacated. The American
veterans of fighting in Norway and now the north Atlantic ambushed two
groups of Soviet recon aircraft, sending eight Tu-16s of various models
down in flames to the waves below. They also used their AIM-120s to take
a heavy toll on the Mig-29s sent out from Iceland to interfere. The
skies behind the advancing *Varyag* were becoming decidedly unfriendly
for the Soviets.

The 122nd Fighter squadron of the Louisiana Air National Guard were
consolidating in the high arctic, at Thule, in northern Greenland. The
pilots in their F-15As were there to defend the Arctic route against
Soviet bombers headed to north America, but also to press in on the
western flank of the Russian surge into the Atlantic. They set up a
patrol area along Greenland’s east coast and raided Soviet recon and EW
aircraft transiting the Denmark Strait. Without a supporting AWACS, the
hunting was difficult. Also, Soviet Mig-31s were probing the American
defenses. Several skirmishes ensued, costing three Eagles and three
Migs, whose pilots were able to use their longer-range missiles to good
effect versus the American AIM-7s.

North of Scotland, RAF Tornadoes and F-15s from the 493rd fended off
more probes from Su-27s, with heavy losses to the Russians as well as
the downing of two more of the British jets. Inexorably, the gap in the
GIUK defenses was shrinking as NATO air power came to bear. It shrunk
much further as the AMRAAM-armed F/A-18Cs from Norfolk arrived and,
after a quick turnaround by Enterprise’s deck crew, began patrolling
north and northwest of the task group, adding their weight to the F-14s
and F-18s already there. Their arrival was timely, as several
uncoordinated raids by Tu-22Ms occurred in the early morning hours, all
turned back or shot down by the American fighters before they could
launch their missiles.

Finally, with the aerial defenses of the north Atlantic largely secure,
Enterprise’s CAG was ready to launch the strike he had been preparing
all night. The weight of Enterprise’s air group would hit the one
remaining gap in the NATO defenses, the Soviet’s carrier group centered
on the carrier *Varyag*.

Post 18

With several hours of darkness left in the night, the alpha strike began
taking off from *Enterprise*’s deck. Nine A-6Es with Harpoon missiles,
three S-3s with the same, eight F/A-18As armed with AGM-84E SLAMs, four
F-14Ds to provide top cover, and two EA-6B Prowlers for EW support. The
strike refueled from KA-6s which had taken off first and topped off
their tanks, then they headed east, the Tomcats leading.

A British Nimrod had been shadowing the Soviet task force all night, its
crew feeding position reports to the Americans, while F-15s from
Scotland had stripped the Soviet formation of its aerial eyes and CAP.
Now, *Varyag* had but one surviving Su-33, and it had flown north to try
to protect the Tu-16s from the Greenland Eagles. The strike package from
Enterprise covered the three hundred miles between the two task forces
in about an hour, heavily laden as they were. In the last few dozen
miles, the F/A-18s accelerated ahead through the darkness. They would
lead the attack.

As the controllers aboard the Nimrod fed the Americans data, the strike
aircraft arranged themselves into their pre-planned attack formation.
Then, as the lead Hornets passed within forty miles of the Soviet ships,
their wings erupted in flame as two SLAM’s shot forward and dove for the
sea. Moments later, the sky behind and bellow the Hornets lit up in
fiery trails as the pilots of the rest of the strike launched their
forty-one Harpoons.

The Varyag’s formation, like that of the Kuznetsov, had been operating
under EMCON to try to confuse American targeting. This would prove to be
a fatal mistake. The Hornet pilots had targeted four of the AGM-84Es to
thread the gap directly between the two Udaloy-class destroyers that
were screening the front of the Russian formation. The SLAM, unlike its
cousin the Harpoon, was guided to its target by passive rather than
active sensors. This meant that, in the early morning darkness, the
first warning the Soviets had that they were under attack was when the
four weapons slammed into the *Slava*-class cruiser *Oktyabrskay
Revolutsiya* and exploded. The damage was as terrific as it was
unexpected, and fires raged out of control along the Russian warship’s
length. The Soviets’ best air defense ship was out of play.

The rest of the Soviet formation reacted quickly to the explosions at
the center of their formation, powering up their radars and defensive
systems. The crews aboard the two *Udaloys* activated their sensors just
in time to see two more SLAMs headed for each ship. The four missiles
all struck home, wrecking both of the destroyers topside and leaving
them listing and burning. The entire western perimeter of the battle
group was now wide open, and the sensors aboard *Varyag* and the
Kirov-class Frunze told their operators of the swarm of missiles that
were sweeping over the wreckage.

The A-6E crews had divided their thirty six missiles, targeting twenty
at the *Varyag* and sixteen at *Frunze*. Soviet missiles began to streak
upward from the Russian capital ships, joined by others from the two
*Sovremeny*s trailing several miles behind. Just then, the EW
specialists aboard both EA-6Bs activated their jammers, sending intense
electromagnetic radiation back down the bearings of the Soviet sensors.
The Prowlers’ crews also added a HARM each to the maelstrom approaching
the enemy ships. Russian SAMs went wild, jinking upwards or diving into
the sea, until the American missiles closed the range sufficiently for
the Russian radars to burn through.

Harpoons began to explode above the wave tops as the Soviet defenses
began to find their mark, but it was too little too late. In all, the
Russians did well, knocking down or decoying more than half of the
American weapons. Even so, six missiles slammed into *Frunze*, and nine
more dove down into *Varyag*, all exploding in quick succession. Both
ships began to burn fiercely.

The last American aircraft to attack were the S-3 Viking pilots, who
used their six Harpoons to make sure of the two burning *Udaloys*. As
the Amaerican formation turned back east, the night sky lit up with two
tremendous explosions as *Varyag* and *Oktyabrsaya Revlolutsiya* blew up
within seconds of each other, the *Slava* as fires detonated the
SS-N-12s in her deck, setting off a chain reaction of other burning
ordnance, and the *Varyag* as fires reached her ruptured aviation fuel
storage. The *Frunze*’s end was less dramatic, but no less sure, as the
battlecruiser slid beneath the fuel-oil laden waves, extinguishing her
fires as she sank.

To add insult to injury, the sole surviving Su-33 pilot had come
screaming back south in pursuit of the Americans who had wrecked his
task force, only to be ambushed by the pilots of the four American
Tomcats and splashed without ever getting a shot off in return.
Moreover, in an attack that would garner criticism after the war, the
two Russian *Sovremeny*s, the only survivors of the task force, would
fall victim later in the morning to Spearfish torpedoes launched by HMS
Talent, which had been trailing the Russians, as the two warships
attempted to pick up survivors from the disaster.

By midday on the 18th, *Enterprise*’s commander could confidently report
that he had annihilated two Soviet carrier battle groups and effectively
sealed off the ALOCs from Soviet aerial attack. A NATO perimeter of
fighters supported by tankers, AWACs, and maritime patrol aircraft
stretched in a long arc from Greenland to Scotland, ready to pounce on
any Soviet aircraft that tried to fly south of Iceland. The SAM
magazines on *Enterprise*’s escorts were low on ordnance, but other than
that the Americans could confidently start planning their counterattacks
against Soviet-occupied Iceland.
