**Northern Fury â€“ Shield of Faith**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ July 2018</u>**

I can't believe I missed a Northern Fury! I must have been seriously
distracted at the time. I played the V1.2 (hopefully that's the latest),
so here's a mini AAR even though its waaay late. (It doesn't feel like
Northern Fury if I don't write down something afterwards. )

**PLAN**

I have operational choices to make at the beginning, which is
interesting. I decide that the F-18s coming in from Iceland will be sent
to Sumburgh. The flight time is shorter, so they will be in action
sooner, and they'll be closer to the enemy, enhancing their reaction
time. My support ships coming in from the Atlantic will therefore go to
Lerwick, with P-3's patrolling the area and my British diesel subs
moving to the meet them in the approaches. The Manchester will also head
to this area, rather than covering the Oslo convoy.

The Oslo convoy will get CAP from the Tornadoes out of the UK instead,
as well as Nimrod patrols to check their path. Surface ships in the area
will converge to join the convoy, and subs will proceed to patrol the
'elbow' near Torp, in an effort to keep anything from sneaking through
to hit the ferry bridge. F-15s and F-16s in the UK will ferry over to
Norway, with all the F-15s and half the F-16s going north to Flesland,
and the rest of the F-16s going further south to Sola.

**PLAYTHROUGH**

ELINT, CAP, and MPA start spreading out in the usual fashion, and it's
not long before the Russians are in action.

Sub launched missiles appear from the north, heading for TG Wright, a
lone high-value logistics ship which only has a single Perry to defend
it. Fortunately the sub's only firing two at a time, so the Perry's
single-arm launcher is enough to defeat the attack, and the Perry's
helicopter hurries to the scene and finds and sinks the Charlie. Several
hours later TG Wright is under fire again, when incoming torpedoes are
detected dead ahead. My own torpedoes are fired down the bearing as the
ships turn and run, and the Perry's helicopter proves its worth again by
finding and killing an SSN almost immediately. My ships turn aside, and
with no sub to provide guidance upates, the heavyweight torps go
churning by on their old course and miss. Yet another sub is found in
the area when an SSK is spotted on radar snorkelling near the east side
of the Orkneys. It gets sunk by a combination of one of the ancient
British O-boats and a passing Nimrod from nearby Kinloss.

In the air there's some skirmishing with Mig-23s north of Flesland, and
then reports of activity at the far end of the Baltic. I end up in a
several-hour long fight with groups of Foxbats and Fencers escorted by
Flankers, which seem determined to hunt down my picket ships (and
possibly my Oslo convoy) off the Soviet-occupied coast of Jutland near
Esbjerg. The battle rages over Zealand, and the streets of Copenhagen
are littered with fallen aircraft parts. A few of their fighters
(although fortunately none of the attack planes) get past me to press on
towards my ships, threatening the Nimrods and the passing cargo planes
heading for Oslo, but fortunately the Tornado CAP is able to deal with
the leakers with the assistance of the F-16s and F-15s transiting to
Norway. I become convinced that the Soviet surveillance radar in the
area is cueing the enemy in to my planes in the area, so I send my
ground attack Tornadoes with ALARMs to try and deal with it. What they
find is that there's an SA-20 in the area, which handily defeats my
missile salvo, and I hold off on any plans to cut across Soviet-occupied
Jutland.

As this is going on I start getting warnings of increased recce activity
up north near Kola. A few of my long-range Tornado fighters are directed
to head further north with tanker support, radar off and staying
discretely out of Soviet radar cover in the long winter night. At first
they have good pickings, creeping up on isolated jammers and ELINT
planes, but then one of them tries creeping up on something that turns
out to be a fighter, not a bomber, and it gets dealt a harsh lesson. I
have to give the coast a wider berth than I thought, and several times I
get chased away by prowling Mig-31s. Nevertheless, a combination of
AWACS and tankers lets my fighters rack up a good score in the northern
darkness by the time the scenario is complete. Fears that the recce
activity was a prelude to heavy bombers turns out to be unfounded. Other
than a few recce Backfires there is no sign of them.

Things are going reasonably well in Norway itself, in the sense that I'm
not losing airplanes. I'm staying well away from the heavy defences in
the Orland area, and I can see Mig-31s and Flankers patrolling there. If
I had F-14s I'd push in, but not with planes with shorter-range missiles
which would cede a 40 mile advantage to the enemy. So I stay put in my
own area, just like the Soviets want me to. However, they eventually
change their mind, and decide to advance, with a dozen each Mig-23s and
Mig-29s heading south to fight. I rush in AMRAAM fighters from the
coast, but I also have to try and resist with Sidewinder-armed F-16s,
which will be problematic. Theoretically my Patriots could contribute,
but in practice the nimble Migs have time to dive below radar cover if I
engage at anything other than extremely short range, so my SAMs don't
help much at all. In the end it is heavy expenditure of AMRAAMs which
wins this one, though it's not unusual to need four or more to get a hit
on a Mig-29; ultra-agile at low altitude with good jammers and chaff. If
the American fighters hadn't flown in already this would have been a
very different fight.

Around dawn I make a try at doing some recce of the occupied airbases in
Norway. My Tornadoes manage to knock down one of the surveillance radars
at Sandane using ALARMs, but their missiles can't get through the
defences at Sogndal. The recce F-5s make a game try, using terrain
masking and cloud cover to every possible advantage, but only one
(barely) makes a successful run, two others are shot down with ease, and
the fourth is waved off before it can commit suicide. The Soviet
low-level air defence environment is not to be trifled with...

Not long after, the Soviets make another push in the air, this time with
10 Mig-31s supported by some Flankers. I gather a big AMRAAM force to
meet them, but this time my pilots know the boot is on the Russian foot.
My SAM gunners disagree, however. The Foxhounds aren't very agile to
begin with, and they're up very high. So high, that they can't dive into
the dense lower atmosphere in time to turn well. They only have old
DECM, and they don't have chaff. So my pilots are ordered to retire
behind the SAM belt, and the Patriots begin executing the Foxhounds. A
two missile salvo is a very reliable hit, and the Patriot warhead is big
enough that it's an auto-kill. Suddenly I have 8 Mig-31 kills, and the
battle is very much in my favour.

The Russians make no big moves after that, and my ships close in to
their harbours. The final moment of excitement comes when an SSK is
spotted snorkelling very near the mouth of the inlet to Oslo, but the
two Nimrods in the area are able to pounce on it. After that everyone
got safely to their destinations, except for some of the cargo planes
with airborne troops. I fumbled the landings a little, and some had to
turn back for lack of ramp space, although it was close.

Fun! Interesting to make operational level decisions about squadron
deployments. Most scenarios don't allow that.
