**Amphibious Forces**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\image1.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.45694in" />

An Amphibious Ready Group (ARG) which carries a Marine Expeditionary
Unit (MEU)

The aspiration of the Reagan era 600 ship Navy was the ability to lift
1.5 Marine Amphibious Forces (MEF) and deploy that force on two hostile
shores simultaneously, while at the same time modernizing amphibious
capability. A MEF is a large force (32,500 troops + equipment) focused
on a full Marine Division supported by an air group and a logistics
element able to support that force for about 30 days. This aspiration
was never met in the real or Northern Fury world. Historically, the
requirement was refined downward in 1993 to 2.5 Marine Expeditionary
Brigades (MEB). In Northern Fury, a combination of retaining older ships
in service and building newer ships went a good way to achieving the
original goal but gaps remained. In the Atlantic, the amphibious force
was able to lift and assault with about 60% of a MEF, plus a Marine
Expeditionary Unit (MEU) permanently on station in the Mediterranean. In
the Pacific, the capacity was slightly smaller and split between the
West Coast and forward based in Japan; there was also a permanently
tasked MEU in the Indian Ocean. In total the Northern Fury USN can lift
about 1.1 MEFs, a capacity that will demand priorities to be set; the
familiar discussion of ‘Europe first’ will ring in the halls of the
Pentagon once more.

1994 finds the USMC in transition between older ‘Amphibious’ doctrine
that has larger forces deploying to its evolving ‘Expeditionary’
doctrine with smaller self contained units or Marine Air/Ground Task
Forces (MAGTF). Both doctrines will be needed in the first months of the
war.

Amphibious forces make a late entry into the Northern Fury Campaign. An
early appearance is **LPD 14 USS Trenton** returning from rotating
prepositioned equipment in Norway, she is now trying to escape the
Soviet advances to seize Iceland early in the war. The only elements in
play at the start are two forward deployed Amphibious Ready Groups –
**USS Peleliu** with **13<sup>th</sup> MEU** embarked in the Indian
Ocean and **USS Kearsarge** with **22<sup>nd</sup> MEU** embarked in the
Mediterranean. At war start the bulk of the amphibious forces in the
Atlantic are tied up in Norfolk and Little Creek Virginia, but deploy
within the first week to conduct a major amphibious operation on Iceland
with two full Marine Regiments as part of **2<sup>nd</sup> MEF**.

In the Pacific **3<sup>rd</sup> MEF,** located mostly on Okinawa assumes
a defensive posture and assist the Japanese Defence Forces (JDF) in
repelling Soviet aggression. An Amphibious TG based on **LHA-3 USS
Belleau Wood** was withdrawn under cover of land and carrier based air
forces first to the Philippines and then to Hawaii. Some elements of
**3<sup>rd</sup> MEF** deployed by air to South Korea before that air
bridge was severed. **13<sup>th</sup> MEU** remains in the Indian Ocean
embarked on the **USS Peleliu ARG** and has a role to play opening up
access to the Red Sea. The remainder of **1<sup>st</sup> MEF** is
preparing to conduct operations in the Philippines area.

**4<sup>th</sup> (Reserve) Marine Division** has had multiple tasks.
Initially they provided several thousand individuals to 1<sup>st</sup>
and 2<sup>nd</sup> Marines to fill gaps, then several specialist
elements such as most of 14<sup>th</sup> Marine Regt (Artillery),
4<sup>th</sup> Recon Bn and 4<sup>th</sup> Tank Bn were CHOP’d to
2<sup>nd</sup> Marines. 25<sup>th</sup> Marine Regt is training to
reinforce 2<sup>nd</sup> MEF while 23<sup>rd</sup> Marine Regt, now
gutted after providing augmentation, is conducting comprehensive
training with new recruits and will likely reinforce 1<sup>st</sup> or
3<sup>rd</sup> MEF.
