**<u>Northern Fury \#18 – Anteater’s Revenge</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, Dec 2021</u>**

***\[NOTE: I’ll include some of the discussion this AAR caused as it
adds many helpful tips to winning this VERY difficult scenario\]***

Following the USN’s efforts to erode Soviet fighter cover over Iceland,
the USAF mounts a major strike that evening. This is aimed at crippling
enemy air operations, command and control, supply and military
government facilities. Just to complicate matters, the strike force and
its supporting base elements then need to fly on to Lakenheath in
Suffolk, England for later missions on the Central European Front.

To do this, you are given 40 F-111, 15 F-117, 10 F/A-18A, 21 F-16CJ and
12 F-15E strike aircraft, plus 19 Phantoms with HARMs and a couple of
B-52s. This force is escorted by 29 F-15s with AMRAAMs and 27 F-15s and
16s with Sparrows and supported by 11 EF-111, two Prowler and two
Hercules EW aircraft. There are also 4 Sentries, 56 tankers, 6 Orions, a
Hercules Commando flying command post, a Dragon Lady high-altitude recon
plane and a Rivet Joint ELINT aircraft.

To reduce the air-to-air refuelling burden on the player (a bit), there
are three artificial ‘floating island’ staging areas where most
attacking planes appear when ready, plus another to the W of the UK for
receiving the transiting aircraft after their missions. These represent
additional tanker aircraft. The briefing suggests that, as these aren’t
real bases, you launch all aircraft there once they’ve completed their
ready times, though there appears to be no penalty for not doing so.

Waiting for you are a still-potent force of Soviet fighters including
all the old favourites and backed by Mainstays and EW planes. Behind
these lurk a formidable array of SAM batteries, including Gargoyles,
Grumbles and Gladiator/Giants, plus smaller types and AA guns. There are
also a couple of Soviet warships (a Kresta and a Sovremenny), which can
augment the SAM defences.

I began by writing-out a schedule of when my aircraft would be
available. No air superiority missions would be possible for the first
three hours, during which time you are restricted to Hornets with HARMs
and TALDs, the recon planes and the tankers. After this, if you adhere
to the spirit of the forward base concept, you’ll have to feed planes in
every 15 minutes of game time or so, rapidly giving yourself an
administrative headache.

Most of your strike planes have GBU-15, GBU-27 or Maverick weapons with
ranges between eight and 15 nm. Sending these in against SAMs with an 80
nm range is suicidal unless, perhaps, you can make use of the rugged
Icelandic terrain to stay hidden until the last moment, then pop-up and
fire. A downside to the latter approach is that you don’t know where
everything is and could easily be ambushed by inconveniently-located
SAMs. Only the HARMs have enough range to give a decent chance of
attacking and getting away without terrain masking and my experiences in
Here Comes the Cavalry did not give me much confidence, even given
jammers in close support. Of course, the F-117s are stealth aircraft and
just might be able to get in close thereby – the proof would be in the
eating.

Given that there were likely to be enough SAMs to stop any number of
attacking missiles, it’s fair to say that I wasn’t optimistic. Indeed,
had I been in command for real, I would have vetoed the mission and
offered my resignation should this decision have been overruled.

Helpfully, all planes start with Auto Evade OFF. I set all fighter types
to Winchester, specified one air-to-air missile per target and set EMCON
to Active for all AEW, EW and maritime patrol planes. Warned that space
at the Lakenheath ‘forward base’ could be tight, I set-up ferry missions
from there to Lakenheath proper and nearby Mildenhall.

Needless to say, I got my rear end kicked but, as I don’t go back to the
last save when things go wrong or pretend that defeats didn’t happen
(after all, who does?), here’s the grisly tale…

22/2/94 16:00Z : I began by launching a Sentry and four tankers, the
intention being to feed the latter in gradually at one or two per base
per hour and learn from experience where the best refuelling points
were. Early indications were that the Russians had a Gargoyle battery at
Reykjavik and two more at the tips of the peninsula to NW and SW, all
able to support each other. Predictably, the enemy radars were off, so
no HARM strikes would be possible unless I could bait them into
illuminating. There was a Mainstay airborne, plus a couple of EW planes
and Foxhounds. It was clear that the Lakenheath ‘forward base’ was
potentially vulnerable to enemy interdiction.

18:00 : Just to complicate things further, I was ordered to re-base my
Orions, Sentries and two squadrons of tankers to Kangerssuaq in
Greenland as they completed their missions – a bit of admin I could have
done without.

As the Dragon Lady recon plane followed its pre-set path to the NW of
Iceland, a Soviet fighter rose to 60,000’ and tried to intercept.
Fortunately, moving away caused it to abandon the chase. Having read
about Foxhounds downing satellites in the Northern Fury book, I wasn’t
inclined to take chances. The Rivet Joint SE of Iceland also needed to
be moved back for security, but both planes supplied useful intel on
enemy air movements until the Sentry could arrive.

A briefing at 18:20 gave an update on residual Soviet strength. This was
estimated at some 118 to 168 fighters. Even if half of these were down
for maintenance, as suggested, clearing the airspace was looking like an
impossible task.

At least I now had a fair idea about where it was safe to station the
tankers. We also detected a couple of suspicious ships to the E of the
Goose Bay and Gander ‘forward bases’, so I sent a couple of Orions to
investigate further. There was a risk that they were SAM traps, so
flight paths would have to be adjusted accordingly.

19:00 : The mission got the green light and I began launching planes as
they became available. Things soon became close to unmanageable, with
too many aircraft to juggle and engagements all over the map as Soviet
CAP reacted. In early clashes, I downed two Fulcrums and two Flankers
without loss, but was keenly feeling the absence of the Phoenix missiles
which gave the USN an edge in earlier battles. Here, things were much
more evenly balanced, with the AMRAAM’s fire and forget ability offset
by the greater range of Soviet Amos and Alamo missiles. For now, loosing
missiles and accelerating away at Afterburner was working. Sometimes, it
was sufficient to keep radars dark but, on others, I needed to turn them
on to get precise targeting. The Russians were being pretty canny,
keeping their fighters well-spread so that I couldn’t fire at more than
a couple at once (I did the same). Fencer EW planes proved impossible to
attack, as before, due to their (over-?) powerful DECM. Enemy planes
score 1 VP each. Tankers needed to be moved-in closer for more
comfortable refuelling.

20:00 : The main aerial duels S of Iceland continued to go my way, with
another two Flankers, three Fulcrums, five Floggers and two Fencer Es
downed without loss. However, with my attention on this, some Floggers
attacked a quartet of Phantom Wild Weasel planes that I’d left circling
off NW Iceland in the hope that enemy radars might come-on. Before I
knew it, all four were lost for an eye-watering 10VP each.

Meanwhile, the suspicious ships were tagged as AGIs. An Orion sank one,
the Vishnya, with two Harpoons (5 VP), then moved on to the second, the
Balzam, which got very lucky, as both weapons fired at her
malfunctioned. I now had to wait for my second Orion to arrive.

21:00 : As word arrived that Poke in the Eye had gone better in this
reality, with the Oscar sunk, the Russians mounted a big CAP surge with
Foxhounds and Flankers. Things did not go well, with 7 Eagles lost for
10 Soviets. Even though the attack was broken-up, the VP balance was
unsustainable. Meanwhile, a Flogger snuck-up on an EF-111 off Greenland
while I wasn’t looking and shot it down for a fearsome 15 VP. I can only
explain the contrast with my superior Eagles’ inability to engage
Fencers and Cubs by suggesting that the latter have OECM/DECM and the
EF-111 only has OECM.

By now, my first 'Winchester' plane had touched-down at the Lakenheath
‘forward base’, but this scores no points, making the whole transfer a
burdensome overhead.

Unable to use HARMs, I couldn’t mount any meaningful strikes on Iceland,
as any other planes would just have been crucified by the SAMs. Given
the attention required on the aerial dogfighting against the aggressive
Russian CAP, I couldn’t spare the time required for attacking with
terrain masking and eventually decided to cut my losses and simply fly
everything to Lakenheath.

The AI then hit a purple patch when almost every missile it fired scored
(often on chances of 25% or so) and the fighter losses became
unacceptable, with a 2-5 deficit in this phase. With the Russians
constantly feeding more aircraft into the fray, securing air superiority
just wasn’t going to be achievable.

To add insult to injury, the second Orion attacked the Balzam and needed
three Harpoons to sink her. What are the chances of four successive
Harpoons malfunctioning on the same weak target?

I quit at this point. It would probably have been possible to get most
planes to the UK, keeping out of enemy CAP range, but this would have
gained me nothing. So, a Major Defeat and not far short of a Disaster. I
can hear Soren saying 'Told you so!'

Main Issues:

1\. Too much to co-ordinate, so your back is always turned to something.
This is probably the thing I like least about Command.

2\. Feeling obliged to launch planes as they became available. Perhaps I
shouldn’t have and this would have reduced Issue 1.

3\. The Russian CAP is too strong and, what with its being fed-in
gradually, this means it is impossible to get air superiority. Without
this, it is very hard to focus on mounting strikes.

4\. Soviet SAM radars being off by default makes HARMs useless unless
one uses sacrificial targets. I considered using the B-52s and their
AGM-67s for this, but they might not have gotten past CAP and I only had
16 of these weapons. I’ve found TALDs ineffective in the past (lack of
range, ignored when radars are off).

5\. Sheer strength of the SAM defences.

6\. Total uncertainty about the effectiveness of SEAD aircraft, as one
can’t see it from the enemy point-of-view.

7\. Lack of visibility of the Russian positions. Perhaps the Dragon Lady
could have gone closer with her long-distance cameras, but her early
near-escape did not encourage.

8\. The heavily-skewed VP schedule makes losses unaffordable. Who would
bet on a close result when they’re offered odds of 1-5 ?

Overall, a chastening experience. Perhaps it was meant to be. I might
experiment with Anteater’s Revenge a bit before moving on to Scenario 19
but, as matters stand, I have no confidence I could ever win it – though
I’m sure there are people out there who have.

**<u>My initial response</u>**

A great report as always Vince.

This is a tough scenario, some of the best players out there have had
difficulty with it, but it can be beaten.

In this [blog](http://northernfury.us/blog/post5/) I explain how I think
through a group of scenarios: One scenario in ten should be almost
overpowering, five out of ten should be difficult, three out of ten
should be fairly manageable, and one should be quite easy.

This is that '1 in 10' scenario where it is almost overpowering - in a
D&D event it could easily equate to a TPK (Total Party Kill).

You will read in Book 2 how it was handled by the Commanders in play...
and might I say, be reassured.

I'll tackle your points in order:

1\. Being overwhelmed. Yes, intentional

2\. Scheduling your launches. You were on the right track with the
schedule you mentioned. Scheduling gives you options and attention
management

3\. CAP - this is an attempt at making the enemy fight smart. It will
also (over the next 4 scenarios) build a tension between you as the USN
and you as the USAF. The results won't match yours, but the idea is
*'The bloody Navy didn't kill enough Fighters*' and in the next scenario
you will feel that *'The bloody Air Force didn't kill enough SAMs*'.
This has a bit of a story goal which will develop over the next couple
books.

4\. Radars Off. The Soviets watched the Gulf War. The AGM-67 will draw a
response, it may not be enough, or it may be too much but the Soviets do
realize that they will destroy a target if not dealt with.

6\. SAM strength. Yup

7\. Uncertainty. Agree, I really like that in the game

8\. VP imbalance. This is perhaps a fair point. In general, I use this
to remind players that NATO losses are not so easily made up. It may be
too steep in this scenario though and skew the game balance.

One of the key factors I wanted to drive home in this scenario was
technology. The F-111 was a fantastic aircraft, although a bit of a
hangar queen. The technologies that were fielded with this aircraft were
cutting edge - when it became operational in the 1960s! Compare with the
F-117 or F-15E. The same is evident in having both the F-4G and F-16
Blk50 Wild Weasel. The F-15A and F-15C. Technology matters. In some ways
there was a need to dispense with teary eyed bemoaning of cancelation of
some of these platforms - which were fantastic - in their day.

Technology on the Soviet part also plays a hand, one of the key lines of
development in the NF storyline is Soviet missile evolution. You saw in
the early days, improved SCUDs, ASATs and now SAMs which on a purely
historic track record would be another decade in development through the
mess that Russia was - but with stability (at whatever cost) these
systems were on track for deployment in the mid 90's.

So I suppose in summary the scenario was (and is) meant as a bit of a
chastening. But things do get better

Thanks again for the report.

**AndrewJ comments**: It's been a long time since I played an early
version of this one, (the AAR is
[here](http://northernfury.us/aar/nf/nfpart2/nf18/nf18_aj/)), and it's
definitely a tough fight. I did reasonably well air-to-air and was able
to make some progress against Reykjavik ground targets with extensive
use of terrain masking and jamming (this was back when OECM was much
more effective than the current model), but still lost a chunk of my
F-117s. I made no significant progress in Keflavik, and the entire F-111
strike was waved off and sent to England rather than make a suicidal
attack. All in all, a very interesting big scenario, but not easy. And
that's okay. Sometimes I have to recognize that things just aren't going
to work, accept the situation, and change course to the best possible
alternative.

**Airborne Rifles comments**:

This is a brutal one, fitzpatv, but the nut can be cracked. I found this
was the scenario that really forced me to use real-world tactic and
apply some of the principles of war to succeed. It also highlights one
issue with the database for the GBU-15 that if resolved, would totally
change the balance of the scenario, I think.

On scenario mechanics, knocking out a sufficient number of Soviet EW
radars will eventually cause them to light up every radar they have.
making the SEAD fight much easier. Before that, though, your Wild
Weasels need to get the radar to light up the old fashioned way - by
exposing themselves and drawing fire! I would use my F-117s to go after
the outlying EW radars and jammers.

On tactics, I found I needed to bring my SEAD in combined packages of
Wild Weasels, EW, and escorting fighters. Don't try to fight the CAP
separately, at least not completely. The southeast peninsula has a
rugged mountain range on its southern edge that can mask a low-level
approach, and the Snaefells peninsula north of Reykjavik is also great
masking terrain. To the east the interior of Iceland is crisscrossed
with rugged valleys and volcanoes that do a great job of masking
low-level approaches. However, your SEAD packages in this scenario need
to bring enough weight of missiles to get through the defenses. In at
least the first few waves you'll need to launch 16+ to get one or two
through with heavy jamming support. The Wild Weasels need to get close -
really close when it comes to the Keflavik area (like around 10 miles to
have a chance of missiles getting through). You can tie up the
responding Soviet CAP with your escorting fighters long enough for the
Wild Weasels to get in and get out. Bringing your jets in as packages
also helps prevent you getting overwhelmed by things going on elsewhere.
I found bringing my Wild weasels in like this this from the north,
south, and east allowed me to wear down the SAMs and the CAP enough to
give my F-111s a relatively free hand over the targets.

Unfortunately, I think this is a scenario that would really show the
F-111 in its best light, but due to the limitations of the simulation it
doesn't. The GBU-15s the Aardvarks are carrying were designed for just
such a scenario. They are TV-guided and designed to be lobbed at heavily
defended targets from behind masking terrain. CMO doesn't model lobbing,
and the minimum drop altitude for the GBU-15 in the database is
currently 10k'. I am hoping that in the future the floor gets lowered to
2k' as it has been for some other GBUs. I think this would allow the
F-111s to approximate lobbing in this scenario by briefly rising to 2k'
to drop the GBU-15s and then rapidly descending behind the masking
terrain, leaving the bomb to glide to the target.

Regardless, you're going to have some hair-raising moments with Wild
Weasels staring down incoming missiles to launch their HARMs!

**<u>Fitzpatv’s 2<sup>nd</sup> run</u>**

OK, so I've given it another go - not that it altered the outcome.

The main principles were to avoid duelling with Soviet CAP where
possible, try to exploit a possible weak point at Akureyri and attempt
to apply Joel's advice against the Gargoyle site at the tip of the
Snaefellsjokull Peninsula. This meant concentrating my efforts in the
NW, so I had to move fighters and F-117s round from Goose Bay and Gander
forward bases to support the strategy. I also decided to launch planes
from the forward bases when it suited me, not as soon as they became
available - AndrewJ's AAR argument about later arrival of aircraft
seemed legitimate enough.

As before, not much happened for the first 3-4 hours. I then disposed of
the AGIs Vishnya and Balzam without the bad luck I'd had first time
round.

Enemy fighters kept intruding into the crucial region NW of Iceland, so
some aerial combat was unavoidable. Given reasonable luck, an Eagle can
beat a Flanker and certainly a Flogger, so the opening duels saw five
enemy downed without loss.

While this was going on, we found and disposed of a third AGI, the
Mayak, off Greenland.

At 22:00, however, two Foxhounds made an aggressive sweep at the
Northern tanker station and caused some havoc. We lost two tankers and
F-15 for both MiG-31s and a Flanker, which left us in VP deficit.
Another Foxhound then came-in over Greenland and was intercepted from
behind by an Eagle. Everything then went wrong, as the F-15 couldn't get
a shot in without turning its radars on and the MiG spun around as soon
as it did so. I missed the enemy fighter three times (two AMRAAMs - fire
and forget? - failing to lock-on) and was taken out with the first
return missile. Another Eagle then needed several shots to take revenge.
At least a Flanker that snuck-up on me while I wasn't looking was shot
down by another F-15 without my intervention (this was the only such
'behind the back attack' the Russians managed in this playthrough). An
Eagle then needed all four AMRAAMs to kill another Flanker. With the US
fighters outnumbered at least 2:1 in this scenario, they really need to
make better use of ammo and sorties, but you can't help the virtual
dice.

While this was going on, I was making repeated attempts to probe
Akureyri, but each met with a vigorous CAP response. More lousy virtual
rolling cost me four fighters for the same number of Flankers - as in
the first playthrough, the AI had a purple patch where it kept hitting
first-time on 20-33% chances, while my shots were going wide on 50%+.

With little hope of winning, I decided to overwhelm the Akureyri
defences with a mass attack. In an early setback, the TALD Hornets
proved to have insufficient range and had to RTB (they tried to refuel
from a tanker in the wrong direction). I used the Sparrow-armed F-15s
from Thule FB to swamp the enemy CAP. This succeeded insofar as both
sides took heavy losses and we temporarily gained air superiority over
Central and NE Iceland, even penetrating to and downing three Mainstays.
On the other hand, it cost me 13 F-15s (65VP) and the Mainstays only
scored a point each.

However, the sweep opened the way for F-16 and F-117 attack planes to
hit Akureyri. Surprisingly, there were no SAMs or even AAA and the
Paveways and GBUs did some damage to the facilities and destroyed some
parked Floggers. Taking-out the control tower scored no less than 6VP
(!), but other facilities (like an ATC radar that needed FOUR missiles
to hit) were worth a paltry 1VP each and, as usual, destroying things
like hangars isn't easy. AGM-67s fired from a B-52 in support were all
intercepted by enemy CAP.

As the planes pulled-out, more Soviet CAP arrived and we lost several
planes on the way out, including four F-117s which, oddly, were only
worth 5VP.

While this was going on, I had more F-117s with HARMs testing the
Snaefellsjokull defences. There may indeed be a mountainous ridge along
the crest of this peninsula, but there's also a Gargoyle site at the tip
with a lovely field-of-fire and this has to be approached across about
50nm of bay in all directions. As I found, there are also radars dotted
along the ridge. For all this, the F-117s proved their worth, avoiding
missiles from the ever-present CAP while locating and destroying three
radars (two messaged as important) and a jamming vehicle. They never
precisely located the SA-20 battalion. It must be said that the trio of
peninsulae in the far NW of Iceland WERE some use for terrain masking.
All Night Hawks then got out OK. Damnably, though, none of the targets
was worth more than 2 miserable VP, leaving me wondering where the big
VP are in this scenario.

After this, I concentrated on getting everything to Lakenheath. This
went efficiently enough apart from one incident where a Foxhound decided
to probe Goose Bay FB and took-out two defending fighters, which AGAIN
needed four missiles to kill it at odds of 60% or so.

So it ended in a Disaster, with a score of -143. NATO lost 2 tankers, 2
SEAD planes, 6 other bombers and 22 fighters (mostly Sparrow-armed), so
36 aircraft in all. The Russians lost 3 Mainstays, 8 Foxhounds, 13
Flankers, 19 Floggers (40 planes total), plus 3 AGI ships, 4 radars, a
control tower, a jamming vehicle and an ammo pad, with damage to other
installations. The great bulk of 27 TAW made it to England.

Significantly, the Soviets did not expend a SINGLE SAM all game, which
is testimony to how potent their CAP is - they really don't need
anything else to win the scenario.

The next scenario doesn't look a lot more encouraging, I'm afraid...
