**<u>Caribbean Fury 2: Retribution!</u>**

15 Feb 1994, 1100 Zulu, 0600 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf2\media\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:7.40625in" alt="US Special Forces seeking subsonic ammunition for covert missions" />

The situation in the Caribbean is somewhat unique in that it is a small
‘side show’ to the great events occurring in Europe, the North Atlantic
and Pacific, but of vital interest to NATO’s largest partner – the US.
The American government and military commanders want to quickly
stabilize the situation here and get on with fighting the ‘real war’.
While at the same time the American public, especially those in Florida
and the south are very concerned with the Cuban situation. The Soviets
want to capitalize on this sentiment and are using Cuba, and in other
situations Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua to distract and tie down as
many US forces as possible.

In this second scenario you’re tasked with continuing the reduction of
Cuban/Soviet combat power while positioning for the next moves. In the
midst of these sweeping objectives, the Commander of the new Special
Operations Command (SOCOM)wants to turn the situation to an advantage by
gaining as much strategic intelligence as possible.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf2\media\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.92569in" alt="Lockheed EC-130 - Wikipedia" />

----------------

**<u>Caribbean Fury \#2</u>** gives the player the problem of balancing
hard strike operations against the more delicate and risky Special
Operations Forces (SOF) action. Key targets such as the Ministry of the
Interior and the Central Railway Station as well as various Television
and Radio stations must be destroyed. Once the Cuban government’s
ability to communicate with its people is curtailed you will need to fly
missions with your own Psychological Operations aircraft over Havana.
Simultaneously, SOF need to be inserted to collect intelligence at
communications facilities and Castro’s home. A kill or capture operation
against Castro himself is a bonus.

Of course, the Cubans don’t like this approach at all and will counter
the player with everything they can including modern Surface to Air
(SAM) missiles to mobile army patrols with tanks and armored vehicles.
The scenario player is faced with a set of problems ranging from the
ultra-tactical to the strategic and faces many key decisions.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf2\media\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.25in;height:4.16667in" alt="Cuban Fire Support Vehicle | Military-Today.com" />
