NATO/US Navy/Amphibious Forces/Amphibious Groups

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/groups/image1.jpg)

The US Navy has a very flexible system of providing credible power
projection anywhere on the globe by using a combination of its Aircraft
Carriers and Amphibious forces. The USMC provides a considerable part of
this power projection in the form of its Marine Air/Ground Task Forces
([MAGTF](https://marinecorpsconceptsandprograms.com/organizations/marine-air-ground-task-force/marine-air-ground-task-force-magtf)).

In the 1980’s the USMC transitioned from its more traditional
‘Amphibious’ force to the modern ‘Expeditionary’ force. Thus the
development of a more comprehensive combined arms doctrine was needed
and this resulted in the evolution of ‘Expeditionary’ elements which
were more self sustained and cohesive than the previous ‘Amphibious’
elements. This evolution was linked to the development of pre-positioned
equipment in key locations around the globe and a gradual change in
organization.

A MAGTF is completely scalable from as small as a few hundred Marines to
as large as a 32000-man Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF). Whatever the
size however, there are always four elements to a MAGTF:

  - **Command Element (CE)** to provide command, control,
    communications, intelligence and to coordinate joint effects in
    support of the mission.

  - **Ground Combat Element (GCE)** providing the combined arms effects
    needed for the mission.

  - **Aviation Combat Element (ACE)** which is task tailored to provide
    all air effects necessary for the accomplishment of the mission.

  - **Logistics Combat Element (LCE)** organized to provide all logistic
    functions to both the ground and aviation combat elements.

In 1994 there were three main sizes of MAGTF’s which roughly correspond
to Army unit sizes, but are much more powerful and flexible due to the
integration of the ACE.

  - **Marine Expeditionary Unit** **(MEU):** Based on a Battalion sized
    GCE with a combined arms complement of approximately 2,200 marines.
    
      - **CE** is small but able to coordinate the effects of all combat
        elements of the MEU. A MEU is commanded by a Colonel.
    
      - **GCE** is based on a Battalion with attached artillery, armor,
        combat engineer, both armored and light reconnaissance and
        amphibious vehicles. The GCE represents about half of the MEU’s
        personnel.
    
      - **ACE** is based on a composite squadron of transport
        helicopters, Attack helicopters and Harriers.
    
      - **LCE** provides all combat service support required to sustain
        the MEU for approximately 15 days.

  - **Marine Expeditionary Brigade (MEB):** Based on a Regimental size
    GCE with significant augmentation and a powerful ACE. A MEB will
    normally consist of about 14-15,000 Marines.
    
      - **CE** is capable of commanding and coordinating all joint
        effects available. A MEB is commanded by a Brigadier General and
        is augmented by a Communications Battalion, Intelligence
        Battalion, Military Police, Psychological Operations, Naval
        Gunfire and Reconnaissance elements.
    
      - **GCE** is based on a Marine Infantry Regiment with attached
        artillery, armor, combat engineer, both armored and light
        reconnaissance and amphibious vehicles. The GCE represents about
        40% of the MEU’s personnel.
    
      - **ACE** is based on a Marine Air Group (MAG) with representation
        from every marine aircraft type including at least two F/A-18
        Squadrons, 2-3 Harrier Squadrons, at least one Attack Helicopter
        Squadron, Medium and Heavy Transport Squadrons, air logistics,
        and air command and control facilities.
    
      - **LCE** is based on a Combat Logistics Regiment and provides all
        combat service support required to sustain the MEB for
        approximately 15-30 days.

  - **Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF):** Based on a Divisional size GCE
    reinforced as required, and a powerful ACE. A MEF will normally
    consist of about 32,000 or more Marines.
    
      - **CE** is capable of commanding and coordinating all joint
        effects available. A MEF is commanded by a Major General and has
        significant augmentation.
    
      - **GCE** is based on a Marine Division with all of its combat
        enablers.
    
      - **ACE** is based on a Marine Air Wing (Wing) consisting of
        significant numbers of combat and combat support squadrons, air
        logistics, and air command and control facilities.
    
      - **LCE** is based on a Combat Logistics Group and provides all
        combat service support required to sustain the MEB for
        approximately 15-30 days.

The USN is responsible for delivering these forces onto a hostile shore,
thus it has designed and created the most capable amphibious ships in
history. There are only two types of standing amphibious groups, which
are designed to deliver an MEU, anything more than that requires a task
tailored organization designed for the task.

  - **Amphibious Ready Group (ARG)** consists of enough amphibious
    capacity to move and deliver a complete MEU. The standard
    composition of an ARG is one LHD or LHA, one LPD, one LSD and one or
    possibly two LSTs

  - **Expeditionary Strike Group (ESG)** consist of an ARG plus an
    escort of one or two CG/CGN, one or two DD or FFG and possibly an
    SSN.

There are generally two or perhaps three MEUs afloat at any time. An MEU
from 2<sup>nd</sup> MEF (Atlantic Coast) is normally positioned in the
Mediterranean or perhaps the North Sea. An MEU from 1<sup>st</sup> MEF
(Pacific Coast) is routinely on patrol in the Western Pacific or Indian
Oceans. 3<sup>rd</sup> MEF has a standing MEU positioned in Japan, this
MEU can be at sea or ashore depending on the state of readiness or
situation. Each of the MEFs could have a second MEU afloat while
rotating their force in or out of a potential conflict area.

In Northern Fury there are two ESGs at sea:

  - ESG Peleliu with 13<sup>th</sup> MEU embarked in the Indian Ocean

  - 
![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/groups/image2.jpeg)

USS Peleiliu ARG

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/groups/image3.jpeg)

Expeditionary Strike Group (ESG)
