<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\su24\image1.jpg" style="width:6.75924in;height:4.21875in" />

[**Su-24
‘Fencer’**](http://www.military-today.com/aircraft/sukhoi_su24_fencer.htm)To
fill the requirement for a long range, all weather strike bomber the
Soviets developed the Su-24 ‘Fencer’, striking in its similar look and
capabilities to the US F-111 ‘Aardvark’. Although both have variable
geometry wings, terrain following radar, long range and as side-by-side
2-man crew configuration, the Fencer was never intended to fulfill the
strategic bombing role that the Aardvark was designed for. The two
aircraft were developed almost in parallel; design was started in the
early 1960’s with the F-111 entering service in 1971 and the Su-24 in
1973. Despite the structural similarities to the Aardvark, the Fencer is
more on par with the Panavia Tornado in role and capabilities.

Designed to replace the Yak-28 all-weather low level tactical strike
bomber, secondary roles were developed as a photo-reconnaissance
aircraft and to conduct Electronic Warfare tasks. Able to drop nuclear
and a variety of conventional bombs with a high degree of accuracy,
Precision Guided Munitions (PGM) capabilities were added later.

Aircraft available to the Soviet forces are somewhat difficult to
determine. Please see the notes below to understand how the numbers were
derived.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\su24\image2.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33889in" />

**Su-24 ‘Fencer- C’:** All original production Su-24s have been upgraded
to this standard. About 300 remain in service in the Soviet Air Forces
(VVS).

**Su-24M ‘Fencer-D’:** Significantly improved avionics with a new
Terrain Following radar, new inertial navigation system, a mid-air
refuelling probe, a laser designator and TV guidance unit for PGMs.
About 550 are in service with the VVS while a further 100 serve with
Naval Aviation forces.

**Su-24MK ‘Fencer-D’:** Export version with downgraded avionics and
weapons capabilities, not nuclear weapons capable. Various quantities
delivered as discussed in the notes below, about 100 (+/- 30) delivered.

**Su-24MR ‘Fencer-E’:** Reconnaissance version with weapons removed but
adding infrared imaging, a TV camera, panoramic film cameras, SLAR (Side
Looking Airborne Radar), a SIGINT (Signals Intelligence) pod, and/or a
laser scanner pod. This aircraft was equipped with a real time data-link
to a ground station for instantaneous passage of images. Self-defence
R-60 (AA-8 ‘Aphid’) air to air missiles were the only weapons carried.
About 100 were built.

**Su-24MP ‘Fencer-F’:** Electronic Warfare (EW)/SIGINT and Electronic
Countermeasures (ECM) variant. In Northern Fury there are 40 of these
important aircraft.

**Note**: Production numbers are not clear, but considering that this is
an alternate history based on reality, some liberties are available. My
deductions/assumptions follow:

-   At least 670 airframes were produced, but probably upwards of 900
    to 1200. For Northern Fury we will assume the maximum, as production
    would have or could have continued past 1991;

-   About 415 were incorporated into the Russian forces (including 94 to
    the navy) after dissolution, 120 went to the Ukraine and 38 to
    Belarus, 12 to Azerbaijan, 25 to Kazakhstan and 32 for Uzbekistan.
    Assuming that all of these were Su-24M ‘Fencer-D’ versions. That
    number (642) equates favorably with production quotes of 630, 635,
    650 and 670 from various sources. Therefore we will assume that the
    more often quoted 650 refers to this model only;

-   Assuming that all ‘MK’ export variants were included in the overall
    figure, we believe that Algeria received 23 (or perhaps only 16),
    Angola had 12 (maybe), Iraq had 24 which flew to Iran who acquired
    another 14 (or 6?), Libya had 6 (or 16), and Syria 22 with possibly
    another 20: Total = between 74 and 131. Assuming 100 we can reduce
    the maximum available to the Soviet forced down to \~1100 (from
    1200);

-   Further at least 100 Su-24MR ‘Fencer-E’ were built and 20 Su-24MP
    ‘Fencer F’ were produced. The low number of ‘MP’ versions is
    unfortunate as these are very useful aircraft (in the game), and
    since these are the most advance version their production could
    continue past 1991 we’ll double that to 40 examples of the EW
    variant. Therefore our theoretical maximum is now reduced to 960
    (1200- 100(MK) -100(MR) -40(MP));

-   Deducting all of this from the maximum production results in 310 of
    which we can write off the 10 for accidents and experimental models
    etc. Therefore 300 Fencer-C airframes are available to the Soviet
    Air Force (VVS)

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\su24\image3.png" style="width:6.52083in;height:4.36896in" />

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\su24\image4.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:8.78889in" />
