**Northern Fury 4: Cold and Lonely Place**

14 February 1994, 1500 Zulu, 1400 Local

Jan Mayen is a Norwegian Island located in the Arctic Ocean 600 Km NE of
Iceland and 1000Km West of the North Cape of Norway. The island boasts a
local civilian population of 18, who are outnumbered more than 2:1 by a
Norwegian Army signals detachment manning the weather station, radars
and LORAN-C transmitter. In the last several hours a C-130 delivered
some Air force ground crew to support a small detachment of F-5s and a
P-3 which have just arrived.

***This scenario is playable by both sides***; however, it will be more
challenging if you play NATO

The Red Banner Northern Fleet has two objectives, neutralize the radar
and communications equipment and supplant it with Soviet equivalents;
and the small gravel runway, **Jan Mayensfield**, which will be useful
for future operations against Iceland.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf4\image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:1.54375in" alt="Jan Mayen Island from the North West" />

The WP player must capture the airfield, destroy all military resistance
and preserve strength and ammunition.

NATO must inflict damage, ensure the local fishing fleet escapes, and
once things become desperate, withdraw your forces to Reykjavík Iceland.
No support should be expected, Norway is fighting for its life and the
Airbase at Keflavik is still closed due to damage from a missile strike
yesterday.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf4\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.3875in" alt="Norway Units" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#4</u>** highlights one of many small engagements
which are critical to the path of any war. Jan Mayen island defines the
phrase ‘middle of nowhere’ and as such becomes as critical to the
fighting in the North Atlantic as the island of Midway did in the World
War Two Pacific campaign. Norway however, has not garrisoned the island
in anticipation of a fight, simply a peacetime communications hub. The
Soviets don’t see it this way.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf4\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.65625in" alt="Could Russia&amp;#39;s Kiev-Class Aircraft Carrier Take On the U.S. Navy&amp;#39;s Best? - Warrior Maven: Military and defense news" />
