**Italian Aircraft Carriers**

The Italian Navy (Marina Militare) is new to operating fixed wing
aircraft from ships, although it has had hybrid helicopter cruisers
since the early 1960s. With the acquisition of AV-8B Harriers the role
of the navy is expanding to more of an expeditionary force as opposed to
conducting Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) operations primarily in the
Mediterranean. Italy has two active and two reserve carriers available
although the Giuseppe Garibaldi is the only truly modern ship.

**C-551 Giuseppe Garibaldi**

![](/assets/images/nato/it/navy/carriers/image1.jpg)

*C-551 Giuseppe Garibaldi with SH-3D Sea Kings and AV-8B Harrier IIs on
deck*.

The *Giuseppe Garibaldi* is the Flagship of the Italian Fleet. Built as
an ASW carrier it was launched in 1985 with the capability to operate
Short Take Off and Landing (STOL) or Vertical Take Off and Landing
(VTOL) aircraft. This was a significant departure from post WW2 Italian
policy and historically there was significant delay in receiving its
full complement of AV-8B Harriers. In Northern Fury however, this
purchase was expedited and the Italian Navy had 12 of its 16 Harriers
operational by the end of 1993. Although this was 18 months faster than
the historic timeline it was still 8 years after they were needed. The
addition of the Harriers allowed the Italian Navy much more flexibility
in roles and freedom of action within its traditional area of interest –
the Mediterranean Sea and Indian Ocean. At war start she is preparing
for a cruise through the Indian Ocean and is ready to sail with her task
group within 24 hours.

**C-550 Vittorio Venito**

![](/assets/images/nato/it/navy/carriers/image2.jpg)

*C-550 Vittorio Venito*

The *Vittorio Venito* is a classic Helicopter Cruiser designed
specifically for ASW and was ideal to lead an ASW task force. With 9
AB-212 helicopters, 40 ‘Standard’ SM-1 air defense missiles, 4 Otomat
anti-ship missiles and 8 76mm guns, she is a very heavily armed ship
ready to take on all roles. At war start she is tied up undergoing
routine maintenance and will be ready for sea within a week.

**Andrea Doria Class**

The two ships of this class are laid up in reserve status. These are
classic helicopter cruisers with room for four AB-212 ASW helicopters.
The *Andrea Doria (C-553)* was modernized in the late 1970s and its air
defense suite was upgraded to the Standard SM-1ER missiles and updated
radar, sonar and electronics. The *Caio Duilio (C-554)* received a
partial modernization but retains its RIM-2 Tarrier SAMs, it has been
the fleet training ship since 1980. The *Andrea Doria* will take about
60 days to activate and put to sea if required, the *Caio Duilio* would
take about six months but activation is unlikely.

![](/assets/images/nato/it/navy/carriers/image3.jpg)
