**Pacific Fury 3: Caught Flat Footed\!**

13 Feb 1994, 1200 Zulu, 2100 Local

![A bow view of the aircraft carrier USS CONSTELLATION (CV-64) underway.
Various aircraft of the carrier&\#39;s air wing are parked on the flight
deck - U.S. National Archives \&amp; DVIDS Public
Domain](/assets/images/aar/pf/pf3/image1.jpeg)

**You are the commander of the USS *Constellation* Carrier Battle Group
(CVBG).** Due to the increased tensions with the Soviets, the Pacific
Fleet’s exercise schedule has been ramped up, and your CVBG has been
participating in a series of exercise over the past six weeks. Departing
San Diego, a couple days after Christmas you deployed to the Philippians
in early January for a multi-carrier exercise with USS *Independence*
and USS *Abraham Lincoln*. Following that, in company with the *Lincoln*
you sailed to Australia conducting ASW and strike exercises along the
way. Your battle group has now returned to the Philippines for Defensive
Counter Air (DCA) training with the Philippine Air Force and about half
your Carrier Air Wing (CAW) acting as the aggressor.

Those plans changed about five hours ago with a FLASH message from
3<sup>rd</sup> FLEET HQ in San Diego. You are now tasked to collect your
battlegroup together and take *Connie* and her chicks north to reinforce
the *Independence* around Japan. Unfortunately, a series of seemingly
disconnected events have created a situation which you are not at all
comfortable with.

It is time to get things under control and get back on the front foot.

![Russia Is Trying To Restore a Giant Nuclear Battlecruiser—It&\#39;s
Not Working Out](/assets/images/aar/pf/pf3/image2.jpeg)

**<span class="underline">Pacific Fury \#3</span>** opens with some
desperate moments as a surprise attack from several angles catches
dispersed elements of the CVBG unprepared. Once the initial shock is
over the player has some good opportunities to strike back and exert a
little revenge.

![VMFA 332 F-18 Superhornet along side Philippine Air Force F-5 Freedom
Fighters circa 2003:
Military](/assets/images/aar/pf/pf3/image3.jpeg)
