**<span class="underline">Northern Fury \#4 – Dagger to the
Heart</span>**

**<span class="underline">AAR by fitzpatv, Apr 2021</span>**

In this relatively small scenario, the Soviet carrier Kiev and her task
force move to support the capture of the Norwegian outpost on the Arctic
island of Jan Mayen. This houses a GLOBUS ICBM-tracking station and is a
stepping-stone on the way to Iceland. You can play either side, but it
is more challenging as NATO.

Taking-up this challenge, you have what is best described as a token
force. The island boasts a basic airbase hosting four obsolete Norwegian
F-5 Freedom Fighters and an Orion. The F-5s have no effective radar. Two
carry rear-aspect-only Sidewinders, while the others are loaded with
Bullpup anti-shipping missiles, which have a range of just 6nm and need
to be watched onto the target (and it’s February in the Arctic). As for
the Orion, it won’t be ready for the first 40 minutes….

At sea, the Danish frigate Vaedderen is tasked with protecting nine
large trawlers. Since she has no SAMs and just a 76mm gun, you have to
hope she won’t have to and, indeed, the Russians are decent enough to
leave them alone. She has a single unarmed Lynx chopper for recon. The
small Norwegian sub Sklinna is patrolling off the S coast of Jan Mayen,
while the SSN Jacksonville is stationed some way to the N.

On land, you have a small garrison of semi-trained troops, backed by
some Rayrider MANPADS for air defence and a basic short-ranged radar
set.

Orders are to do damage, provide intel, save the fishing fleet and
evacuate to Iceland once it gets desperate. This is how it went:

Vaedderen’s chopper flew a recon patrol while the frigate stayed ‘dark’.
She soon found two ships approaching from the NE, but these turned-out
to be a cruise liner and a tanker, not the Soviet freighter Azov, which
was reported to be carrying important cargo.

Meanwhile, the Soviets mounted an airstrike with Yak-141 Freestyles.
These are a big improvement on the earlier Forger and carry Alamo and
Archer missiles (they never made it into service in reality). Rightly or
wrongly, I decided that my F-5s stood no chance against them and kept
them grounded. This may have saved the pilots, but the entire Jan Mayen
air-group was wiped-out by a rain of bombs. This cost 3VP for the
fighters and 15 for the Orion.

A patrolling Freestyle then ambushed and downed the Lynx as it was
turning for home, leaving me with no aircraft, though it cost no VP.

Some Spetsnaz were reported coming ashore near the radar stations, so I
sent my scratch force of infantry to investigate. They found nothing.
Sklinna was sent in that direction on the theory that the special forces
had been dropped-off by submarine. This may have been a crucial
decision.

A wave of Yak-38 Forgers, being used as fighter-bombers, then struck at
the ground facilities. They knocked-out the radar, plus a comms hub and
gas tank, but this cost no points and the Rayriders were able to shoot
down three of them for a total of 15VP (having been unable even to get a
height fix on the Freestyles).

Presently, a Bear ASW plane arrived and began sowing sonobuoys too close
to Sklinna – the move W probably saved her. She dove deep and crept away
SW, managing to escape detection.

For their next move, the Soviets brought-up a wave of An-22 Cock
transports, reputedly some of the largest aircraft ever built, to drop
paras on the island. The remaining Rayriders scored four hits but
unsurprisingly failed to down any of the huge aircraft. Clearly, the
island was now doomed to fall, though the paras never actually appeared
or attacked.

Jacksonville then detected two dangerous Udaloy destroyers screening the
Kiev group. She didn’t fancy messing with them and circled away to the
NW, then NE, trying to get around and attack softer targets beyond the
screen. She evaded successfully and later detected a Kresta-class
cruiser, but couldn’t get in range to attack with torpedoes and didn’t
rate her chances with Harpoons.

At this point, the Azov came into view to the S of Jan Mayen. I ordered
Sklinna to about-turn and head-in at Full, below the layer. Doing so,
she made the intercept and sank the freighter and her hosted Anakonda
chopper with torpedoes, continuing the excellent campaign performance of
Norwegian subs (see H Hour) and netting a vital 140VP.

As this was enough to win, I ordered all units to disengage. Sklinna got
clear despite the reappearance of the Bear, but Vaedderen, running dark
to the NW and Greenland, was detected and sunk by a pair of Freestyles
using Krypton A missiles. I hear of this Danish frigate performing
heroics in this scenario, but I couldn’t really see how, as she’s a very
limited platform. This cost 25VP, but things otherwise wound-down for a
Minor Victory, with a final score of +112.

Just a skirmish, really, with the Azov serving as a sacrificial offering
to give the player a fighting chance against the heavy odds. Next time,
it’ll be back to Bardufoss, where I suspect I won’t get the full fruits
of my success at H Hour….
