**Northern Fury 31 - Shield of Faith**

10 March 1994, 1800 Zulu, 1900 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf31\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.32639in" alt="An air-to-air front view of a C-141 Starlifter aircraft (right) from the 62nd Military Airlift Squadron, and a C-130 Hercules aircraft above snow covered mountains - U.S. National Archives &amp;amp; DVIDS Public" />

Strike Fleet Atlantic (STRIKFLTLANT) is now in the second phase of its
counter attack in the Atlantic. Fighting on Iceland continues but 2 MEF
believes that they will have the island clear within the week. The
scramble is on to reinforce Norway so that Oslo does not become the
third NATO capital to fall in as many weeks.

This scenario is playable by NATO only:

The Soviets have shown strong indications of a renewed attack towards
Oslo and NATO needs to reinforce southern Norway in time to stop them.
Your job in this scenario will be to manage that reinforcement while
protecting some very vulnerable HVU (High Value Units). Time and space
are not your friends in this scenario, it’s a race against the clock and
the geography surrounding the North Sea is much more limited than that
of the North Atlantic, reducing reaction time significantly.
Overcrowding of air bases is also an issue – lets hope this all stays
nice and conventional!

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf31\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.55486in" alt="F/A-18 A/C Hornet - Marines VMFA-451 skin - Eugen Systems Forums" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#31</u>** is a large scenario where management of
resources is almost as important as fighting the enemy. Ramp space at
Gardemoen airbase north of Oslo is limited so the player needs to stage
a large fleet of heavy transport aircraft in and out of the base while
keeping only a handful on the ground at any one time. The Shetland
Islands is also a focus, an entire US Marine Corps Air Group (MAG) of
about 100 aircraft could deploy there, or at the players discretion go
to Scotland instead. Heavy reinforcement ships and specialized /assets
also have to be funneled into this small area. To complicate maters
however, most of Denmark is in Soviet hands.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf31\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.32778in" alt="SS Curtiss (T-AVB-4) - Wikipedia" />
