**Northern Fury 43, Red Devils**

31 March 94 1200 Zulu, 1400 Local (in the drop zone)

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf43\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.29167in;height:4.18721in" alt="Britain&amp;#39;s Parachute Regiment ending most of its jump training due to budgets cuts - Atlantic Council" />

Six weeks into World War Three and the Warsaw Pact has been halted on
all fronts, now NATO is striking back. Overnight 31 March/1 April
STRIKEFLTLANT will conduct amphibious and airborne operations to sever
the Soviet land and sea line of communications (LOC) in Norway. This is
a major operation, and you will play a key role in this critical phase
of the war.

**OPERATION ODIN’S THRUST** is a major joint/combined operation, planned
to take place over the next 96 hours. You will command the British
5<sup>th</sup> Airborne Brigade \[5<sup>th</sup> (GB) AB Bde\] ***The
Red Devils ***in a bid to seize Banak Norway as the Left Flank of a
Corps sized operation. To your west ***\[not in scenario***\], 3 (Royal
Marine) Commando will secure a major logistics and road hub at Alta.
Beyond that two Regimental Landing Teams from the US Marines will land
and to the south two Brigades of the US 82<sup>nd</sup> Airborne
Division will drop in the Narvik area.

A follow-on force of a US National Guard Division and several
independent Brigades is already at sea. In several days \[***not in
scenario***\], the ACE (Allied Command Europe) Mobile Force Land (AMFL)
and the Portuguese Amphibious brigade will arrive under the command of
6<sup>th</sup> (GB) Division, absorb your Brigade and the Royal Marines
and Guard the left flank of the operation.

Your task in this scenario is to seize and hold the Banak area; you have
a large brigade but deploying it will be complex, and the Soviets will
surely strike back hard.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf43\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" alt="Alta Airport - Wikiwand" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#43</u>** covers a lot of area with the Bde elements
taking off from the UK and Iceland, landing in a small area near Banak,
Norway - using essentially the same drop zones the Soviets did on day
one of the war. The Red Devils are a powerful, elite force but not
heavily equipped. The Soviets are a heavily equipped force but not
overly well trained. Once again the British Paratroopers are going
further and deeper than the rest of the force, the player needs to make
sure it is not a bridge too far…

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf43\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.25069in" alt="4 Para - Parachute Jump - Photo" />
