**Italian Naval Aviation**

Italyâ€™s Naval Air Arm is relatively small but, like its navy in general
contains all relevant capabilities.

**[Breguet Br.1150
Atlantic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breguet_Atlantic#Current_operators):**
These fixed wing Maritime Patrol Aircraft (MPA) were operated jointly,
owned by the Italian Air Force and commanded by the Navy with a mix of
Air and Navy crew. There were 18 used by the *88<sup>th</sup> Gruppo*
flying out of Decimomannu Sardinia and Sigonella Sicily. Acquired in the
1970s, these aircraft routinely conduct 12-hour surveillance and
Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) patrols across the Mediterranean and
further afield.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\it\navy\carriers\naval-aviation\image1.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33542in" />

[**AV-8B Harrier
II+**:](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McDonnell_Douglas_AV-8B_Harrier_II#Italian_Navy)
The purchase of AV-8B Harriers for the Italian Navy was a long and
tortuous process with an order being placed in 1989, two seat TAV-8Bs
being delivered in 1991 but the first operational aircraft not arriving
until early 1994. In Northern Fury this timeline is accelerated by a few
months and the first 12 of 16 operational aircraft are available in Feb
1994. The Italian Harrier is night attack capable and can use Precision
Guided Munitions (PGM) but like many Harriers of this era, it does not
have an on board laser designator, nor can it use the AIM-120 AMRAAM air
to air missile. Embarked on the aircraft carrier ***Giuseppe
Garibaldi*** as they operate as part of *Gruppo AI* (Embarked Aircraft
Group).

<img src="/assets\images\nato\it\navy\carriers\naval-aviation\image2.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.86875in" />

[**AB-212**](http://www.marina.difesa.it/EN/thefleet/airfleet/Pagine/ab212.aspx):
These are a derivative of the famous Bell Twin Huey and became the
mainstay of the Italian ship-borne ASW helicopter force. In total 68
were received and they operated of destroyers, frigates and larger ships
including the aircraft carriers. Equipped with a dipping sonar, radar,
FLIR (Forward Looking InfraRed), sonobouys and two torpedoes, these were
very capable in their role. They were operated by *2\*, 3\* and 4\*
Gruppos.*

<img src="/assets\images\nato\it\navy\carriers\naval-aviation\image3.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.09792in" />

**[SH-3 Sea
King](https://www.milavia.net/specials/italian-navy-sea-king/):** Two
man versions of this helicopter were used, primarily operating from
shore installations and from the carriers ***Giuseppe Garibaldi*** and
***Andrea Doria*** as well as the three ***San Giorgio*** Landing ships.

For ASW in Italian service, the SH-3D is called the AS-61B and there are
24 of them working in four squadrons (Gruppo). In the 1980s, 12 more ASW
versions were added, these were the SH-3H (AS-61D) although they are
used interchangeably with the earlier versions. ***1\* Gruppo***, ***2\*
Gruppo*** and ***3\* Gruppo*** operate these aircraft exclusively while
***4\* Gruppo*** also operate AB-212s.

The Air Force operates the second major version, the HH-3F (AS-61R) for
Search and Rescue and supports the Navy in this task.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\it\navy\carriers\naval-aviation\image4.jpg" style="width:6.45833in;height:4.1737in" />
