**Northern Fury 5 AAR**

**By Joel Radunzel**

**First Post:**

This scenario takes place 24 hours into the war. Just a little set up:
if you read my H-Hour AAR you know that in that battle the Norwegians
inflicted crippling losses on the Soviet air strength and essentially
annihilated a Soviet parachute assault on the airfield at Banak. This
scenario starts with the assumption that the Norges didn’t do quite as
well and that the airborne drop on Banak was a success. The Soviets are
in control of north Norway, the Red Banner Northern Fleet (2
Kuznetsov-class CVs, 2 Kiev-class CVHs, and 2 Kirov battlecruisers, plus
escorts and an amphibious group) has broken out of the Barents Sea
(again, no significant casualties, despite my X-Ray Station AAR).

So, after the initial surge the Soviet air offensive quieted down as
both sides licked their considerable wounds. The Norwegians are
reinforced by American F-15 from the US 493rd Tactical Fighter Squadron
and F-16s from the Dutch 332 Squadron. These join the surviving Norge
F-16s and F-5s from the previous day’s fighting. More reinforcements are
expected, but people are screaming for backup all over the world, so
we’ll see what comes. The hub of Norwegian air resistance is now the
airbase of Bardufoss, with Andoya, Evenes, and Bodo supporting from
further south.

The threat of a ground offensive in north Norway in February is pretty
slim, but the bulk of the Soviet airborne strength is still unaccounted
for, and that Soviet amphibious group is out there as well. Analysis is
it’s heading for Trondheim in Central Norway. Norwegian ground forces
are establishing a defensive front at the Lyngen position, but it will
be meaningless if the Russians can envelope it from the air or sea.

To defend the coast, there is a picket line of NATO subs extending into
the Norwegian sea. The USS Annapolis is the farthest out, then HMS
Talent, the Ula-class diesel boat Utsira. Behind these is the older
diesel boat Klin. Further back, tucked into the Lofoten islands are
several groups of missile boats of various types and a pair of frigates,
the Bergen and Stavenger, making their way south to join up with
stronger forces. It’s looking pretty thin.

It’s now noon on 14 February, 1994, the second day of World War III.
Yesterday a truck bomb blew up the Norwegian parliament, killing the
king and the prime minister. Command and control from NATO is working,
but the Norwegian national government s in tatters.

All indications are towards a renewal of the Soviet offensive any
minute. Will they come by air? by sea? both? Will the battered
Norwegians and their NATO allies be able to hold? Read on to find out.

**Second Post:**

The battle for control of the air over Bardufoss began for the
Norwegians at the airfield with an intel update from HQ, Allied Forces
North Norway (AFNN), stating that sources with eyes on the captured
airfield at Banak were reporting a major Soviet strike consisting of
dozens of Mig-23s and Mig-27s staging from the field. SIGINT was also
indicating that the Soviets had been reinforced with regiments of
Mig-29s and Su-27s, and that a Long-Range Aviation strike was likely
forming up over the Kola. The warning was accompanied by an admonishment
to get every ready fighter into the air to meet the threat.

As if to put an exclamation point on this report, the data-link to the
E-3 AWACS making racetracks over central Norway began to show numerous
contacts rising from Banak. Troublingly, at the same time the
technicians on the AWACS also began to pick up significant aerial
activity coming north from southern Finland. The Finns had so far been
troublingly quiet, both about the repeated Soviet violations of their
airspace on the previous day and the few retaliatory incursions made by
NATO jets. This new burst of activity over their major airbases
indicated that this passive posture might be changing.

The three airborne NATO F-16s continued to circle over the Lyngen
position while additional Norwegian and Dutch F-16s as well as American
F-15s began to rotate off the runways of Evenes, Bardufoss, and Bodo and
roar upward into the dreary arctic winter clouds which quickly obscured
them from view. Unfortunately, the exhausted ground crews were
struggling to keep up with the tempo of operations and many of the NATO
aircraft were still in various states of readiness, so the numbers
rising to meet the new Russian push were paltry and arriving piecemeal.
Still, the reports that the NATO pilots were receiving from the
controllers on the AWACS gave them confidence about their ability to
meet the initial Russian thrust.

Based on the emissions from the Russians’ air-to-air radars, the EW
techs on the NATO control aircraft and its accompanying ELINT bird began
to decipher two distinct streams of Russian aircraft approaching central
Norway. The first, coming from the captured field at Banak, appeared to
be composed of about three squadrons of Mig-23s. These would not be
overly difficult for the gathering NATO air strength to deal with, but
dealt with they must be, and therein lay the tactical problem. Behind
the Mig-23s, approaching from bases in the Kola across Finnish airspace,
was a second stream of much more lethal Mig-29 and Su-27 fighters
accompanied by yet more Mig-23s. These would arrive behind the first
stream and after the NATO fighters had been forced to break formation
and expend most if not all of their air-to-air ordnance. Yet another
concern was the northward movement of several flights of Finnish
fighters, who would arrive near the battle space just behind the first
wave of Soviet aircraft.

Still, the NATO pilots had learned many lessons from the previous day’s
combat, which had allowed several of them to become aces. They began to
execute a pre-arranged plan to meet the initial Russian threat. The
original three Sidewinder-armed F-16s turned off their radars, turned
due north, and dove for the clouds obscuring the Norwegian coast while
an AMRAAM armed F-16 and two American F-15s proceeded northeast into the
teeth of the Russian onslaught with their radars on. Two more pairs of
F-16s, one Norwegian, one Dutch, followed the advancing AMRAAM-armed
jets, and a second pair of F-15s were rising to reinforce the battle.

As the first Russian Mig-23s entered the engagement envelope of the
AIM-120s, the two American and one Norwegian pilots began to volley off
their long-range radar-guided missiles. The Russian pilots, who for the
most part had only faced the short-ranged Sidewinders the day before,
were dismayed to hear their radar warning receivers begin to warble a
lethal threat. They began to scan the skies for tell-tale contrails as
the American-made missiles arced towards them. When they spotted the
thin contrails, the Soviet airmen broke formation and jinked and dove to
try to evade. They lacked any weapons that could match the range of the
NATO missiles, and could only try to survive the onslaught at this
point.

Several Russians managed to evade their tormentors by violent
maneuvering and chaff, but several more had their aircraft blotted from
the sky by the cones of exploding shrapnel thrown by the intercepting
American missiles. The shaken survivors tried to reform and continue the
advance to close with the NATO fighters and try to gain some measure of
revenge. Just then, the three F-16s that had detached and flown north
burst upwards through the cloud layer into the northwest flank of the
Russian fighter stream. The three pilots fired off Sidewinders as
quickly as they could bring their noses to bear on new targets, and the
Russian formation once again dissolved into chaos as Mig-23 pilots
turned in every direction trying to evade the nimble IR-seekers.

The surprise assault from the flank was devastating, and made even more
so by the fact that the NATO pilots who had launched the AMRAAMs from
the southwest were also following their missiles in, catching the
struggling Russians between an anvil and a hammer. The NATO pilots had
learned from the previous day’s fighting how to easily evade the
semi-active radar homing missiles carried by the Soviet Mig-23s. Today
this knowledge allowed the more nimble NATO fighters to close with the
more cumbersome Russian jets where they could bring their Sidewinders
and cannons to bear. The result was a slaughter. Mig anfter Mig
exploded, caught on fire, or simply spun or dove out of the sky as the
American, Dutch, and Norwegian jets tangled in a massive furball with
the initially more numerous Russians.

The advantage lasted until the NATO jets began to run out of missiles
and cannon rounds. As one NATO pilot after another expended his last
ordnance and attempted to disengage, he was jumped by surviving Soviet
pilots eager for revenge. A Norwegian F-16 was the first to fall, then
an F-15, followed quickly by another. The situation was only salvaged by
the arrival of the reinforcing Dutch F-16s following the AMRAAM armed
jets up from the south. Then the Finns arrived…

**Third Post:**

Finland, along with Sweden, had sat out the first day of the war,
uneasily watching the conflagration that was enveloping the world and in
particular the rapid Russian advance into northern Norway. The offensive
had come as a surprise to the Finns, but the Russian government had
placed immense pressure on them first to not interfere and then later to
actively join the Russian effort. This pressure included aggressive
mobilizations and maneuvers along the Finnish border around Leningrad
and aggressive naval demonstrations in the eastern Baltic. The tipping
point for the Finnish government came with the fall of Banak. With north
Norway in Russian hands, and no sign of a letup in the Soviet offensive,
the Finns felt they were surrounded and had no choice but to comply with
Soviet demands.

The Finnish dilemma did not come as a complete surprise to NATO. Indeed,
a warning from AFNN had gone out several minutes earlier that NATO
forces were free to engage Finnish aircraft that were behaving
aggressively. This warning, however, was slow to reach the NATO pilots
now engaged in the desperate battle to hold at bay the masses of
attacking Soviet fighters.

A squadron of J-35 Draken fighters rocketed northwest across the
Norwegian frontier and into the furball that had begun to dissipate as
both NATO and Soviet fighters tried to disengage. Finnish belligerence
came as a nasty shock to the NATO pilots who had just turned back one
Russian thrust and were now critically low on ordnance. They ambushed
one Norwegian pilot trying to extract himself from the combat and
damaged a second F-16 before the NATO pilots began to respond to this
new and unwelcome threat. When they did, however, the results were
deadly for the Finnish pilots.

The Finns had not had the benefit of the previous day’s combat to learn
the unforgiving lessons of modern aerial combat. Worse, their fighters
were armed with the obsolescent (American-made) AIM-4 Falcon missile, a
weapon that had been ineffective even when it had first been fielded in
the 1950s. The inexperienced Finnish pilots placed entirely too much
faith in these weapons, attempting to engage the maneuverable NATO
fighters at range instead of closing and engaging with cannons. This was
a fatal error, as the NATO fliers were able to easily evade the Falcon
missiles but still engage the Finns’ attention as two reinforcing
flights of Ditch F-16s approached from the southwest.

When the Dutch arrived, they turned the table on the Drakens, plowing
into the flank of the furball spitting Sidewinders and Vulcan bursts. In
a few short minutes of violent turning combat the Dutch pilots and their
nimble craft, along with the NATO survivors of the initial ambush,
annihilated the leading Finnish squadron of Drakens and blunted a thrust
by a second squadron approaching from the south. This left the NATO
fliers on control of the airspace over the Lyngen positions as the
surviving Russian Mig-23s and Finnish Drakens fled for their bases.
However, they were once again critically short of ordnance, with many
fighters down to one missile or completely out, and others critically
low on even Vulcan ammo.

This was a critical shortage, because the E-3 radiating over central
Norway was tracking a second wave of dozens Russian fighters transiting
northern Finland from the Kola. ELINT platforms had pegged at least some
of these as first line Mig-29s and Su-27s. Not a single NATO fighter now
in the air carried any long-range AIM-120s, and the current allied
airborne strength was wholly inadequate to meet the new Soviet thrust.
The battle would come down to the ability of the NATO ground crews who
even now were frantically readying more flights of F-16s and F-15s at
Evenes, Bardufoss, and Bodo. Would they get their jets into the air in
time? Or would the capable Russian interceptors sweep through the
perilously thin NATO screen and on over their bases to bounce allied
pilots as they took off?

**Fourth Post:**

While the aerial drama developed over the Lyngen position, the Red
Banner Northern Fleet inflicted two hammer blows on the Royal Norwegian
Navy. The first blow fell when a Soviet Helix ASW helicopter picked up
the Norwegian Ula-class diesel boat Utsira on radar close inshore as the
sub was snorkeling. The Norwegian boat quickly dove, but more
helicopters from the approaching Soviet Surface action group joined the
hunt and flooded the restricted waters with buoys. The Ula-class was an
extremely quiet boat, but the radar return had given the Russians a
precise location to start their search, and they eventually detected and
localized the creeping Norwegian sub. A Helix approached the Norwegian
from astern and dropped a light torpedo directly in its wake. The weapon
quickly acquired the submarine and bored in, striking the small vessel’s
screw and sending it and its crew to the bottom of the Norwegian Sea.
The landward flank of the NATO naval picket line was now compromised.

The second blow fell on the two Norwegian frigates, Bergen and
Stavenger, which were fleeing southward to link up with STANAVFORLANT.
They were cruising south close in to the Lofoten Islands when their
radar technicians picked up a spread of torpedoes approaching at an
incredible 70kts from seaward. Both ships turned away and increased
speed to flank, while Bergen launched a Stingray torpedo back down the
bearing of the approaching weapons. The contest between the rapidly
approaching Soviet torpedoes and the accelerating Norwegian ships was an
unequal one. Bergen’s screws were still clawing at the water when a
massive explosion lifted her stern completely out of the water and
slammed the ship back down, a broken wreck in the frigid waters.

The death of Bergen did mask the Stavenger from the remaining Russian
weapons, and her captain ordered her to turn into the attack just as his
sonarmen reported an explosion on the bearing of Bergen’s Stingray.
Stavenger’s captain put his ship on the bearing of the explosion and
accelerated, wanting to ensure revenge for Bergen, which he could see
rapidly sinking now off his port bow.

The Soviet Kilo-class diesel boat that had attacked the frigates had
taken a hit from the light Stingray torpedo in its sail. The explosion
had shredded the sail, but left the submarine still seaworthy and with
all of her sensors intact. Once her captain determined that she was
still in the fight, he began to consider the reports from his sonar room
of the surviving frigate bearing down on him. He quickly realized his
damaged boat was making far too much scraping and grinding noise to
escape. His only chance of survival was to launch another attack. He
ordered his torpedo room to launch two more torpedoes.

Stavenger’s captain’s blood went cold when his sonar room reported the
incoming torpedoes. He hadn’t expected a damaged submarine to be capable
of another attack. He ordered a radical turn and loosed two Stingrays of
his own back down the approaching fish’ line of bearing. In the end,
though, Stavenger’s fate matched that of Bergen. The incredibly fast
Russian torpedoes closed relentlessly on the frigate’s stern and blew
her out of the water. Her captain ordered abandon ship, and the
survivors began to join Bergen’s surviving crew in bobbing orange life
rafts.

Stavenger’s two Stingrays avenged the two frigates, sending the Kilo to
the bottom of the Norwegian sea with no survivors, but the damage had
been done. Norway’s Navy was quickly being reduced to little more than a
coastal patrol force.

**Fifth Post:**

So…I had to reload the scenario from an earlier save after what I
thought was a glitch. This had some interesting effects, namely that the
diesel sub Utsira managed to evade the Soviet ASW helos and break
contact towards the landward most Soviet SAG, and the second salvo of
torpedoes fired by both the Kilo and the frigate Stavanger missed their
targets. Both ships survived and have lost contact with each other.
Otherwise, everything in the previous updates remains the same. So, read
on…

The massive formation of close to forty Soviet fighters, at least half
dangerous Su-27s and Mig-29s, proceeded across the Finnish wedge towards
the airspace over the Lyngen position. The drubbing that the Norwegian,
Dutch, and American pilots had dealt to the first Russian fighter sweep
had been heard by the second wave’s pilots in snippets of frantic radio
chatter over the thirty minutes that that air battle had lasted. What
came over their radio nets next was the stunned reports of the surviving
Mig-23 pilots who were retreating towards Banak. This was causing
confusion among the second wave, whose mission was to set up a CAP over
the Lyngen position and Bardufoss, not to fight their way in. THAT had
been the task given to the first wave. The second wave’s pilots hadn’t
planned for the eventuality that the first wave would be so utterly
defeated, and their organization and formation began to erode. Even so,
the NATO fighters in the air were desperately short on ordnance and the
ground crews at Bardufoss, Evenes, and Bodo were working feverishly to
get more fighters off the ground.

As the Soviet formation crossed northern Finland, the first two American
F-15s took off from Bodo. The pilots punched their afterburners and
rocketed north. These were followed by four more F-15s that rose from
Bardufoss, along with an AMRAAM-armed Norwegian F-16. As these seven
aircraft formed into a line abreast heading east, more F-16s, both Dutch
and Norwegian, began to rise from Bardufoss and Evenes. The NATO ground
crews had done their part, and they now turned their efforts to reading
the next aircraft for the remaining weary pilots. The battle for the
airspace over Bardufoss now at least would be won or lost in their air.

The NATO fliers had the advantage of direction from an E-3 AWACS turning
racetracks over central Norway and of an EW aircraft providing jamming
support. The Soviet A-50 AWACS aircraft, so prominent in the previous
day’s fighting were conspicuously absent today, and the Soviet pilots
were suffering from a lack of knowledge about what was ahead of them.
The controllers on the NATO AWACS fed information to the F-15 pilots who
oriented their battle line towards the front of the approaching Soviet
fighter column. Seven Allied fighters closed with forty Soviet ones,
though the pilots of several additional flights of 16s were punching
their afterburners to catch up.

The pilots of the American F-15s had been approaching with their radars
off, receiving guidance from the controllers on the AWACS. Now, fifteen
miles in front of the oncoming Soviet fighter stream, the Eagle drivers
flipped on their radars and began selecting targets. In seconds they
began to ripple fire AMRAAMs as fast as targets could be illuminated and
engaged. The Soviet pilots, already confused and flying into the
unknown, were caught completely by surprise by this deadly assault.
Their formation, already wavering, fell apart as individual pilots broke
ranks to evade.

The American missiles dove and ripped into the Soviet column shattering
plane after plane and taking a particularly heavy toll of the first-rate
Mig-29s and Su-27s which were at the front of the Soviet formation.
Behind the AMRAAMs came American F-15s and Dutch and Norwegian F-16s
boring in on afterburner. These tore into the surviving Russians,
launching Sidewinders as fast as they could bring a twisting Soviet jet
into their sights. It was a slaughter. The NATO jets tore through the
tattered Soviet formation as red-starred fighters exploded, burned, or
simply fell broken through the scattered clouds below. In minutes the
battle was over. It had been an unmitigated disaster for the Russian air
force. The NATO fighters, after annihilating the leading Migs and
Sukois, had turned on the following Mig-23s and smashed them as well.

The American, Dutch, and Norwegian pilots found themselves bursting
through what had been the back of the Soviet column to clear skies. As
they turned to reenter the fight it began to become clear that there
were no more Soviets to fight. The Russian second wave had been
destroyed completely without the loss of a single NATO aircraft. The
pilots turned back for the sky over the Lyngen position to await further
attacks as the controllers began sending those pilots who were low on
missiles back to base to rearm. So confident was the battle captain
aboard the AWACs after the unlikely victory that he vectored two
reinforcing F-15 from Bodo out over the Norwegian Sea to hunt Soviet ASW
helicopters with the long-ranged AMRAAMs.

Out to sea the Soviet naval deployments were becoming clear. Closest in
to the coast and heading south were two surface action groups of four
warships, each consisting of a Krivak frigate, an Udaloy, a Sovremeny,
and a Kresta-class cruiser. Further to west was the Kiev task group,
with another task group centered on the carrier Kuznetsov far out to
sea. These groups were all advancing roughly abreast, sweeping the ocean
ahead of them. Behind them the AWACS’ radar was beginning to pick up
returns from what could only be the approaching amphibious group that
had be sighted by Trafalgar in the Barents Sea yesterday.

The NATO submarines were particularly well positioned to intercept these
forces, but it would take a great deal of skill by the sub’s captains to
get past the powerful Russian ASW screens to attack the carriers and
amphibs. Killing some to the screens’ helicopters would at least help,
though the American jets would have to stay outside the engagement
envelope of the effective Russian naval SAM systems. Complicating things
further was a CAP of Su-33 fighters flying from Kuznetzov. The Soviet
naval offensive would clearly be a tough nut to crack, if it could be
cracked at all.

**Sixth Post:**

After evading the Soviet ASW helicopters the Norwegian 210-class diesel
sub Utsira had broken contact towards the oncoming Soviet surface action
group. The captain had taken his boat deep to evade the Russian
aircraft, and his positions astride the course of the Soviet ships
allowed him to keep his sub moving at barely above steerageway to keep
noise to a minimum. The Soviet formation was shaped like an inverted
letter Y, with the group’s Sovremeny-class destroyer and an older
Kashin-Mod-class destroyer taking the lead and either leg of the Y,
followed by a Kresta and an Udaloy in column. Utsira’s captain set his
slow course so that he would split the distance between the two lead
destroyers. He planned quietly slip into the center of the Soviet
formation before launching his attack and then using the ensuing chaos
to egress.

To the northeast, another challenge to the NATO pilots patrolling the
skies over the Lyngen position was developing. The Finns were launching
another wave of fighters, this time a mix of Mig-21s and Drakens, while
sorties of Mig-27 ground attack fighters were making sorties from Banak
and proceeding southwest at low altitude. The NATO pilots were once
again low on missiles after annihilating the second wave of Soviet air
superiority fighter, and the controllers in the AWACS were not eager to
put their outnumbered aircraft into a gun fight with nimble Mig-21s.
Additionally, NATO fliers had to divide their attention between the
Finnish fighters approaching at 40,000 feet and the Soviet raiders
coming in at treetop level over the broken and mountainous Norwegian
terrain, meaning one aircraft could pilot could not divide his attention
between two threats.

In the end, the NATO Falcon drivers split up, Dutch aircraft going south
to meet the oncoming Finns, and Norwegians going north to hunt down the
low level attack jets. The Dutch pilots met the inexperienced Finns with
volleys of their remaining Sidewinders before the fight devolved into a
turning furball of twisting and turning F-16s and Mig-21s. The
experience of the battle-hardened NATO pilots quickly told, and Finnish
Migs and Drakens began to fall again through the clouds, joined by a
lone flaming Falcon. The battle was quickly over, with the surviving
Finnish pilots turning and punching their afterburners to escape.

Further north, the Norwegians were struggling to intercept numerous
pairs of Mig-27s as they infiltrated through deep mountain valleys
towards Bardufoss. They managed to down or turn back most of the
raiders, but one pair burst through and bore down on the airfield. The
40mm Bofors guns defending the field opened up at the low flying jets as
they streaked over the tarmac and released their ordnance. Green bombs
fell off the Russians’ wings and slammed into the taxiway. Earth and
pavement were heaved into the air as the Migs streaked away and turned
back into the rugged snow-covered mountains. Almost before the dust had
settled bulldozers were speeding out to smoothe away the damage done by
the Russian bombs. The two Migs made good their escape as the NATO
pilots continued to joust with the other Soviet and Finnish intruders.

At sea the Utsira’s captain had maneuvered his sub into position in the
middle of the landward most Soviet SAG. With the throbbing screws of the
Russian ships all around him, he ordered his boat to ascend and make its
attack run. This was where the small 210-class sub’s eight torpedo tubes
would show their worth. When the Utsira ascended through 100 meters the
captain gave the order and the whole ship shuddered eight times as two
torpedoes were launched at each of the four southward moving Russian
ships.

The Russian reaction was swift and violent. The two leading destroyers
each launch torpedoes towards the point from which their sonarmen
reported numerous torpedoes radiating outward. Simultaneously, RBU
anti-submarine mortars began to cough from all four ships, sending
bomblets towards the diving and accelerating Norwegian submarine.
Despite the volume of fire, the Utsira’s captain managed to avoid damage
and dive his boat deep as his own weapons sped towards the Soviet ships
as bomblets roiled the water around them. Then the chief sonarman
reported deeper, larger explosions.

The first Soviet ship to die was the group’s flagship, the Kresta-II
class cruiser. The first Norwegian torpedo struck her bow and crumpled
the entire front of this ship. Moments later the second weapon passed
underneath the wrecked bow and detonated directly under the keel. As the
column of water subsided the Russian cruiser groaned and then broke in
half. The two parts quickly sank, leaving few survivors.

The next casualty was the Kashin, followed quickly by the Udaloy. The
former capsized after two torpedoes plowed into her port side, while the
latter lost all power and began to settle by the stern. The Sovremeny
managed to evade the first enemy weapon, but the second bored in and
detonated under her stern, lifting it out of the water and slamming it
back down. The destroyer quickly began to settle by the stern until her
bow lifted out of the water and the whole ship slid backwards with crew
members jumping into the icy waves.

Unfortunately for the Utsira, just before the last torpedo had detonated
under the Russian Sovremeny, the enemy ship’s crew had launched one last
lucky salvo of RBU mortars. These straddled the fleeing subs position
with one bomb actually striking the boat just behind the sail. Water
flooded the control room as the pressure hull failed, and the Utsira and
her crew joined the wreckage of the Russian SAG on the bottom after one
of the most violent and deadly naval engagements of the war.

**Seventh Post:**

Though the loss of the Utsira was bitter, the complete destruction of
the landward-most Russian SAG suddenly opened up possibilities for the
NATO forces to set the conditions to go on the offensive at sea. The
controllers on the AWACS had watched with mounting excitement as the
electronic signatures and radar returns from the four Russian ships
disappeared one by one. This excitement was compounded when the captain
of the older Kobben-class diesel submarine Kinn, operating some distance
south of the Utsira’s patrol area, came to communication depth and
reported he had detected, tracked, and eventually sunk a Soviet
Foxtrot-class diesel boat. This, combined with the damage inflicted on
the Kilo further north, seemed to indicate a severe weakening of the
Soviet fleet’s eastern flank.

Quick planning was conducted by the staff at AFNN, and they presented a
plan to the theater commander to focus their anti-surface efforts on the
one Soviet group that could both be engaged decisively and whose
destruction would upset whatever plans the Soviets had for the Norwegian
Sea: the amphibious group trailing the three surviving Soviet surface
groups. This force was possessed of a strong escort, but it was
nonetheless weaker than that of the Kuznetsov or the Kiev-class carrier
(probably the Admiral Gorshkov, since the Kiev had been identified
earlier in the day north of Jan Mayen).

ELF messages went out to the nuclear submarines USS Annapolis and HMS
Talent, which were stalking the Kuznetsov and Gorshkov groups
respectively. The two subs duly came to communication depth and their
captains grudgingly received instructions to break off contact with the
Soviet carriers and skirt the enemy screens to proceed north. They were
instructed to come to communication depth at a pre-determined time to
attempt a combined missile attack on the amphibious group’s escorts with
their combined eight Harpoon missiles. The subs would then close and do
what damage they could with torpedoes. The missile attack would
hopefully weaken the group’s screen enough for AFNN’s commander to play
the two Aces he was keeping up his sleeve: two squadrons of F-5As at
Andoya and Bodo configured for an anti-surface strike, and the four
groups of missile boats currently sheltering in the Lofoten Islands.

In the meantime the NATO cap over the Lyngen position continued to fend
off low-level Soviet raids by Mig-27s. Most of the enemy flights coming
in at low level were either shot down or turned back, but one enemy
flight managed to evade interception and burst through to the Norwegian
naval base at Olavsvern. The pilots of the two attack jets released
their bombs and baked for home. The six bombs tumbled down and exploded
outside the blast doors of the massive complex burrowed into the
mountain flank of a fjord. Damage to the actual facilities was minimal,
and the two raiders were bounced by Dutch F-16s on their egress. A third
Finnish wave, weaker than the previous two, was also turned back with
heavy loss.

The success of NATO airpower over the Lyngen position allowed COMAFNN to
execute the first part of his staff’s plan to smash the Soviet
amphibious group. A pair of F-15s had already been sent out to hunt
Soviet ASW helicopters but had been kept at bay by the air defenses of
the landward SAG. When this group suddenly disappeared, its ASW
helicopters were left suddenly without any top cover. Even worse for the
Russians was the fact that the amphibious group’s commander had
dispatched several of his escorts’ helicopters to assist in the hunt for
the now-dead Utsira. These all became easy prey for the American
interceptors who dove on the defenseless choppers and remorselessly
downed them one by one.

Once these were destroyed the Eagle drivers dropped down to low level
and streaked in towards the next Soviet surface group, the other SAG.
The two pilots used AMRAAMs to destroy the helicopter screen for this
group as well. The American fighters were inexorably caving in the ASW
defenses of the Soviet east flank as the Annapolis and Talent dove and
adjusted course to approach the amphibs from the west and south. COMAFNN
began to feel a glimmer of confidence about his plan to foil the Soviet
designs in his theater.

**Eighth Post:**

Over the Lyngen position, the weight of Soviet numbers began to tell.
Though the NATO pilots in their Falcons and Eagles continued to smash
and turn back successive waves of Russian aircraft, the volume of
sorties the Soviets could put in the air was beginning to cause strain
on the NATO logistical systems. Pilot after pilot expended his missiles
in swirling dog fights with groups of Mig-23s supported by more cautious
flights of Mig-29s and Su-27s. By now every NATO fighter, other than the
F-5s being husbanded for the strike on the Soviet amphibs, was in the
air or being rearmed after one or sometimes two sorties over the past
two and a half hours.

Soviet losses were heavy, but NATO casualties were beginning to mount as
well. A Dutch F-16 fell to a high deflection cannon burst from a Mig-23.
Minutes later, and F-15’s pilot banked into the path of one air-to-air
missile while trying to evade another. Two more Norwegian F-16s were the
next to fall. One pilot was unable to shake an AA-11 fired at long range
by a Mig-23, and the other was shot down when he failed to account for
the air to air armament of the Su-24 attack aircraft he was
intercepting. Even so, the air defenses over the Lyngen position managed
to hold on and turn back each successive Soviet thrust, leaving the
skies further west clear for the mission against the amphibious group.

The pieces for this operation were moving into place. The USS Annapolis
and HMS Talent would come to communication depth soon and be standing by
to launch their Harpoons on order for a coordinated attack. At the
Andoya and Bodo airfields the F-5A pilots gathered in their ready rooms
to receive their mission briefings. Sixteen aircraft would participate
from the two fields. Ten would be armed with the obsolescent AGM-12B
Bullpup missile. This Vietnam era weapon possessed a diminutive 250lb
warhead, required the launching pilot to guide the weapon all the way to
the target, and had a measly range of only 6 nautical miles. Four more
of the F-5As would carry Rockeye cluster bombs, and two more carried
Mk82 general purpose bombs. The armament was far from ideal, but the
ordnance was all that was available in north Norway at the moment.

As the mission briefings proceeded, the mood in the ready rooms became
increasingly pessimistic. The screen of the amphibious group was strong,
consisting of two Krivak-class frigates, A Kresta II-class cruiser, one
each Udaloy and Kashin-class destroyer, and worst of all from the
perspective of the pilots, two Sovremeny-class destroyers with their
string air defense suites. The F-5 strike had no chance of seriously
denting this force. Instead the goal of entire air strike was to destroy
the Udaloy to open up the Russian screen for the SSNs to do the real
destruction. The idea was for the Harpoons from the SSNs, coming in from
the west and south, to fix the attention of the Russian air defenses
while the F-5s approached at low altitude with jamming support from the
east, concentrating all their attacks on the Udaloy. Ideally the
airstrike would have been delayed so that it could coordinate with the
missile boats waiting to the south in the Lofoten islands, but that
would push the attack onto hours of darkness, and the F-5s were not
equipped to conduct night attacks.

Once the briefing was complete at Andoya, the squadron commander stood
up and addressed his pilots.

“Men, I am not going to lie to you. Some of us, even many of us, will
likely die in this mission. Our EW is inadequate, our weapons have too
short a range, and the Russian defenses are strong. But the Russians
caught our country with our pants down during the Olympics. They’ve
already overrun the north, and if the naval infantry in those transports
get to their destination then we may lose central Norway as well. Right
now, we are the only thing that NATO and our country have to throw at
those bastards, and those subs out there are counting on us to weaken
the screen. Remember, these are the people who killed our king
yesterday. I know you all know what things were like the last time out
country was invaded. We cannot allow that to happen again. When we go
in, I want no wavering, no hesitation. Even if the planes to your left
and right go down, you must keep going and deliver your weapons on
target. The future of Norway depends on you. That is all.”

The pilots met the speech with thoughtful silence, and then began filing
out of the warm briefing room and across the icy tarmac to their
aircraft, which were undergoing they final checks from the ground crews.
A few minutes later the first of the twin-engine fighters rotated off
the runway at Bodo, headed north.

Far to the west, at precisely 1600 local time the two NATO subs,
Annapolis and Talent, came to communication depth and received their
targeting instructions and vectors from AFNN. Both subs came to
periscope depth and conducted one scan with their radars, quickly
locating the large formation of Soviet ships…

**Ninth Post:**

Four Harpoon canisters exploded out of the water in front of HMS Talent,
followed seconds later by four more fired by USS Annapolis more than
forty miles to the northwest. The rocket engines for the eight weapons
ignited and all settled into their wave-top altitude for the short
flight to the southwestern arc of the Soviet formations. Both sub
captains had ordered their missiles to be targeted at what appeared to
be the flagship of the Soviet formation, the Kresta II cruiser. They
each immediately ordered their boats deep and altered course to evade
any counterattack.

At the same time the controllers in the AWACS transmitted a one word
order to the flights of F-5As approaching the amphibious group from the
east. The sixteen pilots dropped their aircraft down as low as they
could fly with their heavy loads and fanned out on an intercept course
for the Udaloy cruising on the northeast quadrant of the Russian
formation. They were supported by electronic jamming from a Falcon 2 ECM
aircraft (essentially a corporate jet airframe full of ECM equipment),
which was cruising at the margin of the Soviet SAM envelope.

The Harpoons crossed into the Russian SAM envelope just before the
fighters crossed from the opposite direction. The jamming behind the
jets ensured that the Russian were able to achieve firing solution on
the missiles first. Air defense missiles began to explode from the
mounts on the Sovremenys, heading west and south to intercept the
incoming Harpoons. So far the Norwegian plan was working to perfection,
with the Russian attention fixed away from the approaching fighters.
SA-N-7s streaked out, leaving smoky arcs leading away from the two air
defense destroyers. Then the Russian radars began to burn through the
NATO jamming and the plan began to unravel.

The air defense coordinator on the Kresta, realizing the threat
materializing from the electronic haze to the east, ordered his two
Sovremenys to split their fire between the missiles and the approaching
F-5As. More missiles arced out towards the northeast as the radar
warning receivers began to chirp at the Norwegian pilots, sweating in
their cockpits as they fought to keep their planes above the wave tops.
Other ships began to add their missiles to the fire arcing over to meet
the Norwegian onslaught.

The first several missiles plowed into the sea or exploded beyond the
oncoming Freedom Fighters. Then an SA-N-7 exploded directly in the path
of a Rockey carrying F-5, which immediately cart wheeled into the sea.
The raiders crossed to ten miles of range to the Udaloy as another F-5
was swatted down, then another, and another. Six miles, and the pilots
of the AGM-12B equipped jets began launching their radio guided missiles
at the Udaloy class destroyer now clearly visible directly ahead.
Missiles shredded two more aircraft and also began to engage the
incoming missiles. Two miles. In a flurry of missile and gunfire and
chaff two Bullpup missiles plowed into destroyer amidships and exploded,
starting fires around the RBU ASW mortars. Two more impacted the water
within 20 meters of the ship, causing superficial damage. The rest of
the missiles had either been destroyed by defensive fire or, the pilots
who were to guide them in now dead, continued harmlessly over and past
the ship.

The surviving F-5 pilots, finding themselves in a maelstrom of fire from
the Soviet ships, each launched their second AGM-12B at close range.
Missiles continued to shred aircraft as they turned north, trying to
escape on afterburner. One more Bullpup plowed into the fantail of the
Udaloy and exploded, immediately stopping one of the destroyer’s shafts
from spinning and slowing the ship to eleven knots. Another missile
crashed onto the sea just behind the Russian ship.

The few surviving Norwegian pilots had no idea what damage they had
caused to the Russian ship, but they were shocked at the losses to their
own ranks. One of the survivors was the squadron commander, distraught
at the loss of his men and still desperately trying to escape himself.
He cried out in frustration as the F-5 to his left exploded and fell 100
meters into the sea. Then the jet to his right disintegrated. He looked
around, realizing he was the only one left. He felt tears well in his
eyes as he thought of his parents and the families of his squadron
mates, just as an SA-N-7 exploded into his engines. The F-5 nosed down
and disintegrated into the dark blue-gray Norwegian sea.

The air defense officer aboard the Soviet flagship breathed a sigh of
relief as the last of the sixteen enemy jets disappeared from his radar
screen. The eight missiles approaching from the south and east had all
been easily engaged and destroyed by missiles from the west-most
Sovremeny. He was amazed by the courage shown by the enemy raiders. How
could they have hoped to survive against the concentrated fire of this
screen? Then the damage reports began to come in.

The captain of the Udaloy, on his bridge as his damage control teams
tried to control the fires started by the three missiles, reported that
his ship could not stay information and was dropping back. The best he
could do was 11 knots, not nearly fast enough to keep up with the 18
knot convoy. The sacrifice of the Norwegian fliers had not been entirely
in vain. Now it would fall to the crew of the HMS Talent, lying in wait
across the amphibious group’s southward course, and to the crew of the
USS Annapolis, hurrying to close with the convoy from the west, to
exploit the crack opened by the brave Norges.

**Tenth Post:**

The Soviet amphibious group, with the damaged Udaloy-class destroyer now
trailing further and further behind as her crew tried to bring the fires
in her mid and tail sections under control, continued at 18 knots on a
course of south-south-west. The group’s commander had detached one of
his two Krivak-class frigates to escort the damaged ship. Even with the
loss of these two ships the group’s screen was strong, consisting of the
two Sovremenys, the Kresta-class cruiser Kronstadt, the remaining
Krivak, and two Kashin-class destroyers, along with the organic weapons
carried by the amphibious ships themselves.

Opposing this group were the two NATO SSNs. The captain of HMS Talent
had already laid his ship astride the course of the Russian ships and
was making 5 knots at 300 meters depth while waiting for the Russians to
arrive. Twenty-five miles to the west the crew of USS Annapolis was
cruising south at 25 knots in order to get ahead of the Soviet group and
execute their own ambush well to the south of Talent’s position. The
plan transmitted by COMAFNN to the commanders of the two SSNs before
they dove after their unsuccessful missile attack was for HMS Talent to
attempt to pass to the rear of the Soviet formation and finish off the
Udaloy. Annapolis would then ambush the front of the Soviet formation to
destroy the two Sovremenys with their strong air defense suites. This
would leave the Russians vulnerable to the final phase of the NATO plan
for stopping the amphibs.

The third part of NATO attack would involve the three groups of missile
boats that had been biding their time hiding in the rugged coves and
bays of the Lofoten Islands, which arced southwest away from north
Norway like a tail. The plan was for them to move west and rendezvous
with the aim of launching an overwhelming missile attack against the
Russian ships with their Penguin Mk. 1 and Mk. 2 missiles. The
neutralization of the two Soviet air defense ships was vital to the
success of the attack. After a curt radio order from AFNN, the crews of
the Hauk and Sturm missile boats motored out into the gathering dusk and
warily turned their small craft towards the weak setting sun.

Hours passed as the various ships closed with each other. HMS Talent was
the first to make local contact with the Russians as the lead units of
the enemy formation bore down on her position. Talent’s skipper chose as
aggressive strategy. He directed his boat to dive deep and put her on a
course to pass directly under the thrashing propellers of the Soviet
ships to then pop up and attack the rear of the formation. As the
British submarine passed the outer screen of the Soviet ships this plan
began to unravel. Somehow the leading Krivak had caught a whiff of the
stealthy sub and the frigate’s captain, already on edge after the
combined missile and air attack, launched two torpedoes at long range to
try to flush the faint contact.

The tactic worked, after a fashion. The captain of the Talent, Commander
Pimm, realizing that he had been detected and that his plan to get to
the rear of the Soviet column was now impractical, decided on a
different and equally aggressive course of action. As the Russian
weapons came on still several miles distant, HMS Talent accelerated to
20 knots and ascended above the thermal layer. As the sub came shallow,
Pimm ordered his four ready torpedoes launched, two each at the oncoming
Sovremenys, and that the torpedo room then launch their fifth ready
weapon at the Russian flagship, the Kresta II. Talent shuddered four
times, followed a few seconds later by a fifth, as the modern Spearfish
torpedoes exited her tubes and sped on their outward radiating paths
towards the heart of the Russian screen.

“Take us deep, if you please,” ordered Pimm, and his sub tipped down and
accelerated away from the still oncoming Russian weapons.

The Russian counterattack was swift and violent. Far to the rear of the
Russian group the Udaloy, based on data provided by the Russian
flagship, began launching rocket-propelled Metel ASW torpedoes arcing
over the amphibs to splash down near where the Russian sonar operators
believed the stealthy British sub would be. One splashed down a mile to
port of the talent and began its search pattern. After one circle its
active sonar picked up the British boat and the weapon turned to give
chase. Talent’s screw thrashed the water to get away but the torpedo
closed relentlessly.

At the last moment Pimm ordered, “launch countermeasures, hard to
starboard\!”

The Russian weapon bored in and accelerated through the cloud of bubbles
created by the noisemaker and into the knuckle of water created by
Talent’s sharp turn, continuing on straight as the British boat
completed her turn to go on a reciprocal heading. Talent’s crew let out
a collective breath.

The reprieve was only temporary, however. The two torpedoes launched by
the Krivak were still approaching, not from directly ahead, and unknown
to Pimm another Metel rocket was also inbound. On the other hand, the
efficient British torpedo room had managed to reload three tubes with
half of the remaining Spearfish torps.

Pimm ordered a snapshot of two weapons against the leading Soviet
frigate and targeted the third at the flagship. Just then a low rumble
reverberated through the hull. The sonar room reported an explosion on
the bearing of the Kresta-II. The 60-knot spearfish launcheb by Talent’s
torpedo room had struck the cruiser’s fantail and wrecked her
propulsion, leaving the ship dead in the water. To the north and
northeast of the stricken cruiser the two Sovremenys were maneuvering
wildly to try to shake their tormentors. The captain of the east-most
destroyer was the most successful. He managed to interpose his towed
decoy between the lead Spearfish and himself. The British weapon
detonated in a luminescent column of white water behind the ship. The
explosion also blinded the second torpedo, which was following several
hundred meters behind, and this fish then continued straight on behind
the stern of the destroyer.

The second Russian destroyer wasn’t nearly so lucky. The lead Spearfish
plowed past the towed decoy and detonated directly under the Sovremeny’s
stern, lifting the rear of the ship completely out of the water, her
screws still thrashing wildly. The ship crashed back down in a froth of
white water and smoke just as the second Spearfish detonated under the
now wrecked fantail. The rear of the destroyer broke off entirely, and
front two thirds of the shift tilted upwards until the entire structure
was vertical before the entire wreck plunged straight down into the sea.

Aboard Talent, Pimm’s torpedo room reported the destruction of the one
Russian destroyer, but was unable to confirm if the other had been hit.
Just then the second Metel splashed down behind the British boat and
began an active sonar search pattern. The torpedo room had managed to
reload two of the remaining three Spearfish by this point, and hedging
against being sunk Pimm ordered these two launched at the last known
position of the first Sovremeny. The commander then ordered an evasive
turn and dive as the Russian weapon turned into them.

This time Pimm’s luck held. The Talent’s captain ordered several
noisemakers ejected. These succeeded in luring away the latest Russian
attack.

Back above the surface in the darkening arctic night the remaining
Russian ships were in confusion. The flagship was dead in the water with
a single torpedo bearing down. The lead frigate was fleeing two other
torpedoes, and the sonar operators on the surviving Sovremeny had just
detected two more weapons bearing down to replace the two they had
already evaded. The next Russian ship to die was the flagship. The
Kresta-II had been settling by the stern until the second torpedo
approached head on and wrecked the ship’s bow, actually detaching it
from the rest of the cruiser. The Kronstadt sank quickly, her surviving
crew jumping and tumbling into the frigid arctic water.

Next to die was the fleeing Krivak. When the smoke and water column
cleared from the detonation of the two torpedoes there was nothing left
but debris and oily water. The last to die was the remaining Sovremeny,
which took two Spearfish to the starboard side and slowly rolled over,
taking most of her crew with her. The Russian screen had been reduced to
the two old Kashin-class destroyers, along with the limping Udaloy far
to the rear escorted by one more frigate.

The Russians didn’t die alone, however. A final Metel had splashed down
directly behind Talent just as the reverberations from the last
explosions quieted. Pimm’s luck finally ran out as the Russian weapon
impacted the sub’s screw, destroying all propulsion. Pimm ordered an
emergency blow that succeeded in surfacing his crippled boat, and then
ordered abandon ship. Sailors tumbled out of the British submarine’s
hatches and into survival rafts as the submarine began to settle by the
stern more quickly. The proud boat then sank out of sight, taking with
her several crew, including her captain.

The Russian amphibious group continued south with a much-weakened
screen, ignoring the Talent’s rafts.

**Eleventh Post:**

The Russian amphibious group continued south with its much-depleted
screen. To the west, USS Annapolis, her captain unsure about the outcome
of HMS Talent’s attack, proceeded south at 25 knots on a parallel
course, trying to get at the flank of the Soviet group. To the east the
Norwegian missile boats rendezvoused with the Norwegian frigate
Stavenger and then proceeded on an intercept course with the Russian
ships at their best speed of 32 knots.

More than 90 minutes passed as the various units closed with each other.
The next allied ship to make contact with the amphibs was the Annapolis.
Her captain, Commander Adams, chose a conservative approach for his
attack run. He would move in from the east and launch a spread of Mk48s
at any escorts he could target at maximum range. He would then evade and
assess the success of this attack before reengaging from a different
vector. Annapolis turned west and slowed to 5 knots for the approach.

After a while, Adams’ sonar room reported that the only escorts they
could make out were two Kashin-class destroyers and a Krivak-class
frigate hurrying up from the rear of the enemy column. Talent’s attack
couldn’t have been so successful that the escorting force was reduced to
such a level, could it? Adams suspected a trap, and chose to keep with
his conservative approach.

In reality, things were even worse for the Russians than they seemed to
Adams aboard Annapolis. Talent’s attack had emasculated the group’s
escorting screen, while further back luck had run out for the damaged
Udaloy. The fires started by the three Bullpup missiles had continued to
burn despite the efforts of the crew’s damage control parties. Now they
had spread and were burning out of control along much of the ship. The
destroyer had eventually lost power and her captain bowed to the
inevitable and ordered abandon ship. The captain of the escorting Krivak
had come alongside and taken off the surviving crew before ordering his
ship south at full speed to catch up with the transports. The small
warship was approaching the rear of the advancing column when she was
detected by Annapolis.

Adams, suspecting a trap, opted to stay with his conservative plan of a
long-range attack on the escorts. As Annapolis came into range of the
column’s seaward flank, Adam’s ordered four Mk48s launched. The sub
shuddered four times, and her captain then ordered a turn to port and a
dive to 900 feet.

The torpedoes sped on their way for a surprisingly ling time before the
Russians reacted. By then it was too late for the older Kashins to
evade, much less detect their attacker. Both ships succumbed to a single
Mk48, which exploded under their keels in the dark arctic night. The
Krivak, carrying the survivors of the Udaloy, wasn’t any luckier. A Mk48
ripped into her, causing terrible casualties and tumbling the survivors
into the sea, come of whom had lost two ships from under them in as many
hours.

The Soviet transports were now without escort, but Commander Adams
conservative approach and evasive course meant that he was now out of
position to press his attack short of another lengthy run to the south.
Now it was the turn of the Norwegian missile boats, speeding in from the
east, to finish the job.

**Twelfth Post:**

The Hauk and Sturm missile boats sped across the dark rolling waves of
the Norwegian Sea towards the landward side of the Russian column. Their
crews were using their advanced optics, thermal and night vision systems
to search for their quarry. The EW aircraft over central Norway had
reported one by one the disappearance of every single escorting radar in
the Soviet formation, and the Norwegian sailors were beginning to feel
not just determined, but confident about their mission.

The crew on the lead small craft picked up the Russian ships on the
western horizon and radioed their sighting to the other eleven boats.
Each carried four Penguin ant-ship missiles, and the crews began to
ripple-fire these as the low shapes of the Soviet LSTs and other
transports began to appear on their screens.

The Russian defenses organic to the amphibious transport proved
surprisingly effective at knocking down the incoming threats,
particularly since the Norwegians had failed to launch their weapons in
a single, coordinated strike. Even so, about half of the transports were
hit, and several, weighed down with their heavy loads, began to sink.
The missile boats, now out of missiles, pressed in on the Soviet
formation like wolves attacking a wounded reindeer. They sped in and cut
through the Russian ships, firing their 76mm deck guns and 40mm Bofors
as fast as the crews could work them. The Russians fought back,
particularly the large Ivan Rogov-class LPD at the center of the
formation.

The Russian admiral in overall command, having realized lake the danger
her amphibs were in, had dispatched four Yak-38s from the Kiev-class
carrier Baku to safeguard these ships. These now arrived and attempted
in the dark to intervene in the slaughter. They lined up on three of the
Norvegian boats speeding into the column and dove, releasing their bombs
just as Mistral missiles reached up towards them from two of the small
ships. The bombs straddled one of the boats, causing superficial damage.
At the same time, one of the stubby fighters exploded as it was hit by a
Mistral SAM and fell into the sea behind the Norwegians. The Russian
aircraft, now devoid of weapons, climbed and banked away, leaving the
transports to their fate.

In the end, the small guns of the dozen Norwegian missile boats pummeled
each Russian ship into wreckage one at a time. The last to succumb was
the big Ivan Rogov, whose crew managed to hit several of the Norwegian
boats with their own guns before they were swept from their posts by
fire from several directions. A dozen transports, along with the Naval
Infantry brigade they were carrying, were dumped into the icy waters of
the Norwegian sea and the small and deadly boats withdrew into the night
towards the Lofoten islands.

The allies had suffered losses, particularly among the F-5A squadrons,
but the Soviet strategy for seizing central Norway was now in shambles.
