**The North Atlantic Treaty Organization
([<span class="underline">NATO</span>](https://www.nato.int/cps/ic/natohq/index.htm))**
was formed on 4 April 1949, as a Military/Political body to counter the
threat posed by the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact (WP)countries. The
basis of the alliance is the collective defence codified in
[<span class="underline">Article
Five</span>](https://www.nato.int/cps/ic/natohq/topics_110496.htm) of
the treaty which states: “…that an attack against one Ally is considered
as an attack against all Allies.’

The 12 founding members of NATO are:

Belgium,

Canada,

Denmark,

France, (Withdrew from NATO’s integrated military command in 1966,
rejoined 1994.)

Iceland,

Italy,

Luxembourg,

the Netherlands,

Norway,

Portugal,

the United Kingdom, and

the United States.

The following countries joined NATO between its foundation and the start
of Northern Fury in 1994:

Greece (1952)

Turkey (1952)

West Germany (1955)

Spain (1982)

The reunification of Germany in 1990, meant that the former East Germany
was drawn into NATO. Between 1989 and 1994 the reunification of Germany
became a major friction point between NATO and western European
countries and a resurgent Soviet Union.

Collectively this force – in Europe alone – amounted to over 3.7 million
soldiers, sailors and airmen under arms, tens of thousands of armoured
vehicles, thousands of aircraft and hundreds of ships. A formidable
force. Command of this force, with 16 governments and defence ministries
involved however can be complex, not to mention the scale of the
geography and diversity of capabilities. At the top of the Command
Structure is a political body – the North Atlantic Council (NAC) which
oversaw the military element of the Alliance on behalf of the member
nations. Next in line was the NATO Military Committee (NMC), which
issued broad policy, interfaced with the NAC and had direct
communications with each nations Ministry of Defence (or equivalent).
While the NAC and NMC dealt with issues at the Strategic level,
operational planning and execution of warfighting tasks was conducted by
three commanders: Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) commanding
all forces in Europe (Allied Command Europe); Supreme Allied Commander
Atlantic (SACLANT) commanding all forces in the Atlantic (Allied Command
Atlantic); and Commander-in-Chief Allied Command Channel (CINCCHAN). The
remainder of the operational portion of the NATO command structure is
depicted on the chart below:

![](/assets/images/nato/image1.png)

On the tactical level were dozens of Corps, Air Forces and Fleets,
however clear distinction below the level depicted becomes complex
because many of the commanders were ‘double hatted’ meaning the
Commander had two roles. For instance, SACLANT was also Commander US
2<sup>nd</sup> Fleet, and Commander NATO Strike Fleet Atlantic
(STRIKFLEETLANT). Another example is that CINCCHAN, was not a ‘Supreme’
Commander as the other two (SACEUR & SACLANT) but he was Commander in
Chief FLEET (British Royal Navy) and Commander in Chief Eastern Atlantic
Area, under SACLANT.

Instead of digging into the detail of NATO’s tactical structures, this
[<span class="underline">Wiki
page</span>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structure_of_NATO#Structure_in_1989)
provides a good summary in the section ‘**Structure in 1989’**.
