**Northern Fury 10, Eisenhower moves North**

**AAR By Joel Radunzel**

Post 1

As the *Enterprise* battle group is attempting to blunt the Soviet sure
into the north Atlantic, the Eisenhower battle group, having done some
hard fighting in the Med, has now passed Gibraltar and is making its way
north to reinforce. The *Eisenhower* possesses a powerful group, but
also some major disadvantages. First, due to the fighting in the Med,
the group is scattered for replenishment. Currently, the *Eisenhower*,
escorted only by the *Ticonderoga*-class cruiser USS *Vicksburg* and the
frigate USS *Halyburton*, is the furthest north of the American ships,
west of Cape Trafalgar. However, *Ike*’s escorts are down to about 50%
ordinance in their magazines.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf10\nf10_jr\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:6.81528in" alt="Map Description automatically generated" />

Hurrying to catch up with the *Eisenhower* is the bulk of her group,
escorting the replenishment ship USS *Detroit*. This group, besides the
*Detroit*, consists of the nuclear-powered cruiser USS *Virginia*, the
brand-new USS *Arleigh Burke*, the frigate USS *De Wert*, and the
Spanish frigate *Numancia*. Even further back, having gone to Toulon to
replenish magazines, is a second *Tico*, the USS *San Jacinto*,
accompanied by the *Spruance*-class USS *David R. Ray*. These are still
in the Med but approaching the straits of Gibraltar. Both groups will
need to hurry to catch up with their carrier, since the *Eisenhower*
must be on station west of Ireland in 48 hours to link up with the
replenishment ship HMS *Fort George*, on her way from Portsmouth, and
start launching strikes against Soviet-occupied Iceland. Once the *San
Jacinto* rejoins *Ike*, the commander must detach *Vicksburg* to Brest
so she can refill her VLS cells. What this means is that all American
ships, including the two 688-class subs screening ahead, USS *Boston*
and USS *Albuquerque*, will need to move much faster than the CVBG
commander would like, given the submarine threat from the Soviets.

Not only is the naval force scattered, but so is *Ike*’s air group. Air
ordnance stores onboard are also low, and the air group sustained losses
in the Med. These losses will be made good by replacements from Norfolk
flying in over the next two days, but for now the group is thin,
particularly since two squadrons of F/A-18C Hornets are currently at
Rota receiving emergency upgrades to allow them to use AIM-120 missiles.
The CAG is ok with the arrangement for now since the air threat is
currently low this far south. The sub threat is what is causing the TG
commander heartburn, particularly since his ships need to move so fast.

NATO possesses resources to deal with this threat, however. Besides the
organic S-3 Vikings and helicopters aboard the American ships, the
Portuguese navy has provided a two-frigate task group, led by the *Vasco
de Gama*, to clear ahead of *Ike*. Spanish and Portuguese P-3s will
sanitize the area around the straits and northward, as will three
submarines. A detachment of Amrican P-3s is also operating out of Rota
in support. A French task group is moving into the Bay of Biscay from
Brest. Farther north, the submarine HMS *Churchill* and British Nimrods
will sanitize a path for the HMS *Fort George* and her escorts, the
frigates HMS *Beaver* and HMS *Hermione*. Final, the brand-new
Portuguese frigate *Corte Real* is to the west, hurrying forward with
orders to join *Ike*’s screen.

So, the task for the *Ike*’s commander, RADM Grundal, is to move north
with dispatch, reassemble his battle group and replenish his ships *en
route*, and not lose any to the Soviet submarines lurking in his path.
That, and be prepared to fend off a strike from Soviet bombers as he
moves farther north. Easy, right? We’ll see.

Post 2

2300 19 February

Captain 2nd Rank Matros of the Soviet Navy stood in the control room of
his submarine, creeping silently 30 meters beneath the waves 200 miles
off the northwest coast of Spain, concentrating on his mission. He knew
from his latest update from Red Banner Northern Fleet that several
submarines had been lost in the past several days in the north Atlantic,
more than one captained by a friend of his. He was determined not to let
the same fate befall his ship and crew. He concentrated on the second
part of the update, which had assigned him a very important mission. An
American carrier was coming north from the Straits of Gibraltar with a
light escort, and he was in an excellent position to intercept it. This
might be the best chance yet to destroy one of the Americans’ vaunted
carriers.

Captain Matros was in command of one of the most advanced submarines his
country could produce. The submarine he commanded was the *Pskov*, one
of what NATO had designated as the *Sierra-II* class of nuclear attack
boats. Quiet and lethal, it was the perfect tool for penetrating the
American ASW screens, he believed. But his boat was not the only
resource at his disposal. His coordinating instructions had given him
clear guidance about what to do if and when he detected the American
flattop...

-----

2310 19 February

Aboard USS *Eisenhower*, RADM Grundal swore at the response he had
received from fleet headquarters. His request for an extra 12 hours to
get to his assembly area had been denied, again. He handed the message
to his flag captain, who had come up to the flag bridge to receive
instructions.

“What this means, Pete,” the Admiral said, “is that we’re going to have
to haul ass all the way up to the north Atlantic. The escorts’ sensors
won’t do us much good. Even worse, *Boston* and *Albuquerque* have to be
even further north than us by the deadline. They’re going to need to go
deep and do a long speed run just to make it in time. I don’t like the
idea of them running across the sights of some lucky Russian just to
meet a deadline. Even worse, the rest of the task force coming behind us
is going to need to go to flank speed just to catch up with us! It’s
some mess we’re in.”

The flag captain nodded, then tried to mollify his Admiral. “Sir, at
least we have the Spanish clearing the way for us to the north.”

Grundal grimaced. “I don’t have a lot of confidence that those old
Spanish frigates are going to do us much good. Besides, your patrol
planes report a group of fishing vessels along our projected course. Any
one of those could be a Russian spy. I want you to shift our course to
the west slightly, further out to sea. Just enough to avoid those
fishing boats.”

The CAG, who was also present, piped up, “I’ll get on adjusting our ASW
patrols. Give me a course and I can have our S-3s sanitize a lane for
us. I’ll get on the horn to Rota and see if those P-3s can’t give us
some support.”

Grundal nodded, then turned to his N3 and said, “Get a message off to
the subs: I want them following the same sanitized lane as us. If they
have to do a speed run, best they do it where we can at least warn them
if some Russian is up ahead. Set up a comms plan for them to come
shallow at regular intervals.”

The N3 nodded.

“Any questions?” Grundal asked. “No? Then let’s stop burning daylight.
Make it happen!”

“Aye, sir,” the flag captain said as he departed to give the necessary
orders.

A couple of minutes later the Admiral felt the massive bulk of the
carrier shift beneath his feet. He looked ahead out the flag bridge
windows as the dark shadow of the carrier’s bow swung several points to
port. Further ahead he could just make out the wakes of USS *Vicksburg*
and *Halyburton* as they executed the same maneuver, maintaining their
stations in line ahead of their charge. He could also make out the
navigation lights of the ASW helicopters operating off the carrier and
its escorts to the front of the formation. Just then an S-3 Viking
patrol plain rocketed down one of Ike’s forward catapults and into the
sky amid clouds of steam, headed north by northwest. Grundal would feel
much more comfortable when he had his whole battle group back around
him. For now, they were cutting things very close.

The CAG stuck his head back in the bridge. “Admiral, Rota just
confirmed. They have three P-3s for us to use. The fourth is getting an
engine replaced and won’t be available any time soon. But they can
promise us continuous presence over the corridor. They just won’t have
anything to flex to prosecute contacts elsewhere.”

“Understood,” said the Admiral. Then to his N3, “Get a message off to
the *Detroit* and *San Jacinto* task groups. I want them following along
in our wakes, along the same corridor. Once they get through the
straits, they need to go to maximum speed to catch up, understood? We
may well need their full magazines the further north we get.”

Post 3

0030 20 February

The commander of USS *San Jacinto*, Captain Coors, yawned and stretched
his arms, leaning back in his command chair in the cruiser’s CIC. It had
been a long, tense run from Toulon, and their time in port hadn’t been
particularly restful either, what with having to deal with the French
dockyard bureaucracy just to get his VLS cells filled with missiles. You
would think they didn’t know there was a war on, he thought. He was
beginning to allow himself to relax. One of his helicopters had just
finished the hour-long process detecting, tracking, and finally
localizing a submerged contact several miles to their south, which had
turned out to be a large and wily school of Tuna fishes.

He smirked at the groans among his crew when the contact’s identity had
been revealed. They had been all keyed up to drop a torp on the contact.
Coors knew he couldn’t be so bold, not in these restricted waters. He
almost wished the Spanish Navy would keep their submarines out of the
straits he would need to transit in a couple of hours. Their presence
complicated things for him, forcing his sonar techs to make doubly sure
of their target before he could engage. On the other hand, those two
subs were more sensor platforms for any Soviet sub to evade if they
wanted to make trouble around here. Regardless, for now, the threat
board was clear. The USS *David R. Ray*, a *Spruance*-class destroyer
cruising several miles ahead, had primary responsibility for C2 of ASW
ops for their little task group anyway. Perfect time to get some
much-needed shut-eye.

“Officer of the deck,” Captain Coors announced, “I’m headed to bed. No
need to wake me unless we detect a probable hostile.”

“Aye, sir,” the lieutenant acknowledged.

The captain walked the few yards to his cabin, entered, and threw
himself on his bunk, pausing only to remove his shoes.

Captain Coors awoke with a start, confused.

“Sir?”

“Hmm?” the captain grunted.

“Sir?” the sailor repeated. “Sir, the officer of the deck sent me to get
you. He says we have a probable contact.“

Coors blinked his eyes. “What time is it?” he asked groggily.

The seaman looked at his watch. “0230 sir.”

Two hours, thought the captain. He didn’t feel any better than when he
had lay down. Worse, actually. “Ok, sailor. Tell the lieutenant I’m on
my way, and there better be coffee waiting when I get to CIC.”

The sailor fled as Coors stood and splashed water on his face from the
sink. Then he walked to CIC.

“What’s the situation?” the captain asked as he strode into ship’s
command center, looking more awake than he felt.

“Sir,” reported the OOD, “a few minutes ago the *David R. Ray* reported
picking up a submerged contact to our southwest. Directly west of us are
two Spanish frigates heading our way, the *Descubierta* and the
*Baleares*. The contact is nearer to them. We’ve contacted them and they
have nothing on their scopes.”

“Another biologic?” asked the captain.

The lieutenant shook his head. “Unlikely, sir, this one’s moving at
twenty knots or better. Looks like it’s trying to get in range of those
two Spaniards.”

Coors pulse quickened. A seaman handed him a mug of coffee, but he
didn’t need it. He was wide awake now. He couldn’t think of a reason why
any of the Spanish diesel subs he knew were around would be cranking
speed like that. But he had to be sure. “What is *Ray* doing?” he asked.

“Their helo is up and headed that way sir,” answered the lieutenant.

“Tell *Ray* to remind them that we need to be absolutely sure of the
contact’s identity before dropping on it. Shouldn’t be too hard at that
speed.”

“Aye, sir.”

Coors looked up one of the large computerized map displays showing the
outlines of the Spanish and north African coastlines almost coming
together to his ship’s front. The symbols for the two Spanish ships
appeared on an eastward course several miles east of the strait. To
their south and west, the symbol for the unknown submerged contact was
shown with its vector pointed to the northeast, on an intercept course
with the Spaniards. Between Coors’ ships and the contact was the symbol
for *David R. Ray’*s helicopter, call sign Air Wolves One-Zero, speeding
outward. The submerged contact was getting uncomfortably close to the
frigates.

“OOD,” the captain said, “call *Baleares*. They should be able to hear
that guy by now. Ask them if they suspect this to be one of their
boats.”

The lieutenant complied, then reported, “Sir, they say they have
negative contact with any submarine. Baleares reports they believe their
submarine on this side of the straits is to the north, repeat, north of
their location.”

Coors nodded and watched the symbol for Air Wolves One-Zero, an SH-60B
Seahawk, slow and flare to a stop near the estimated location of the
contact. Over the radio he heard, “This is Air Wolves One-Zero, lowering
sonar now.” Then after a few moments the tinny voice said, “Contact,
contact, definitely a diesel-electric boat, repeat, definitely an SSK.
Raising the dome and moving north to triangulate, over.”

Silently Captain Coors wished the helo pilots to hurry. That sub,
whoever he was, was quiet, even at the speed he was running, and he was
getting uncomfortably close to the Spanish ships, who were still
reporting that they couldn’t hear it. After a few seconds he heard,
“Madman, madman, madman, dropping flares.” Several miles away the pilot
of the SH-60B triggered red flares over the piece of ocean where his
magnetic anomaly detector had just registered a large magnetic mass.
Then the tinny voice said, “lowering dome...contact...Ray, we have a
preliminary ID, over.”

“Go ahead, Air Wolves One-Zero,” came response from Ray’s CIC.

“Roger, my tech says is sounds like a Kilo making twenty
knots...wait...transient, transient! Torpedoes in the water! He just
launched torps. We make two fish, heading north-northwest, over!”

Coors blood ran cold. In a voice that was calmer than he felt he
ordered, “Tell *Baleares* and *Descubierta* to evade north. They have
got to be able to hear that!” The changing vectors on the symbols
representing the two Spanish ships indicated that he was right. “Looks
like that bastard launched at long range. Tell the helo to drop on that
son of a bitch. Weapons free!”

Air Wolves One-Zero acknowledged. The sonar tech in the back raised the
dipping sonar and the Seahawk banked right, guiding off of the flares
that had dropped earlier to come in behind the Russian sub. After a few
seconds Coors heard, “Fish away!”

Next the OOD reported, “Sir, Ray reports their towed array has our fish
running hot straight, and normal...and theirs too.”

“If we can take out the Kilo then their fish won’t have the wires. The
Spanish will have a much better shot at evading,” Coors said. to no one
in particular, willing the Mk46 Lightweight Aerial Torpedo onward.

The crew of the Soviet sub, a *Kilo*-class boat with the less than
exciting name of *B-401*, never had a chance. Air Wolves One-Zero had
dropped within a quarter mile of the boat’s churning screw. The Soviet
sonar operators didn’t even have time to shout a warning before the
Mk46’s warhead detonated against the propeller, mangling it and causing
flooding to the engine room. The shaft continued to turn, now making
tortuous grinding noises for all to hear.

“*David R. Ray* reports a positive hit, sir,” reported the *San
Jacinto*’s ASW officer.

“Did we kill it?” asked the captain.

The younger officer listened to his headset for a moment, then
responded, ”Negative, *Ray* reports they can hear damage but the contact
is still submerged and making headway...enemy torpedoes are still
bearing on targets.”

Coors swore. “Tell the helo to re-engage!”

Air Wolves One-Zero was already banking for another pass with its second
torpedo. The second attack was a repeat of the first. The weapon dropped
into the water and immediately acquired its target, dove, and exploded
against B-401’s already mangled screw. The explosion completely opened
the rear compartments of the boat, slamming the Russian damage control
parties forward in a cascade of water. The submarine lost all power,
then began to slide backwards to the shallow seafloor below.

“*Ray* reports a good kill!” announced *San Jacinto*’s ASW officer.
There was no cheering in CIC. Captain Coors ran too tight of a ship for
that, but he did see a few of the sailors at their consoles in the
blue-lit room pump their fists and mouth “Yes!” in silent triumph. Coors
was still watching the tracks of the two Soviet torpedoes bearing on the
Spanish frigates.

As he watched, he saw the two ships bear away to the north, coming onto
a course that took them out of the way of the two fish, which had been
launched at long range. The torpedoes, now lacking guidance from their
mothership, reached the end of their vector and, failing to find
anything with their onboard sensors, began searching in an S-patters for
anything to attack. They found nothing, and eventually sank to the muddy
seafloor below, joining the boat that had launched them.

“Sir,” the communication petty officer called across the CIC,
“*Baleares* is on the line. He wants to extend a thanks and
congratulations on the kill. He also reports that a Spanish P-3 from 221
Escadrille out of Moron airbase says they just sank a *Victor* on our
line of advance.”

Coors smiled grimly, then said, “Good! I’m going back to bed.”

The captain was halfway out of the room when he heard a petty officer
call, “Sir! Task *Group Vasco de Gama* is calling a mayday! They report
the frigate *Afonso Cerqueia* just took a torpedo forty miles west of
Lisbon and is sinking fast!”

Post 4

0330 20 February

Aboard USS *Eisenhower*, Rear Admiral Grundal slammed his fist into the
bulkhead in frustration. Out the starboard window he could just make out
the glow on the horizon that marked the graves of the two Portuguese
frigates, *Vasco de Gama* and *Afonso Cerqueia*, that had been assigned
to screen ahead of his carrier. The fact that he had ordered his
depleted task group to the west, away from whatever Russian had
torpedoed both ships, did not make him feel any better.

The admiral looked over at his flag lieutenant and said, “Ring up the
CAG. I want CSAR birds over there to drop supplies to the survivors. We
can’t alter course to pick them up. The Portuguese Navy is going to need
to send a rescue boat. But we can go after the bastard that attacked
them. Call up the on-station P-3 and tell them I want them to head over
there and start looking for that sub. Better for now to hunt where we
know the enemy is rather than where we think he may be. The S-3s can
handle our corridor for now.”

“Aye, sir,” the flag lieutenant responded, before making the necessary
call to the ASW screen commander.

Thirty miles ahead of the carrier, the pilot of Trident Three-One, the
P-3C sweeping ahead of *Ike*, banked his four-engine aircraft to
starboard, ascended, and pushed his throttles forward to their stops. He
wanted to cover the forty miles between his bird and the sinking
Portuguese ships in as little time as possible. The Russian was almost
certain not to stick around after his victory. The sooner his aircraft
arrived the better chance he had of bagging a sub.

As they flew the ASW screen commander updated the pilot and his crew on
the attack. “The *Vasco de Gama*’s captain reported before they went off
the net that the attack was from head on, that they never even heard the
submarine that launched the fish. *Afonso Cerqeia* had been in the lead
and took the first hit. Just as *de Gama* was maneuvering around the
wreck the second one hit her. That’s when we lost contact. Given how
little time the Portuguese had to track the fish, I would guess that the
enemy is in very close.”

Trident Three-One’s commander agreed with that assessment. His MAD gear
wouldn’t be much good so near the sinking frigates, but he still had
plenty of sonobuoys aboard. He ordered the technicians in the back to
begin plotting a pattern around the location of the attack. Fifteen
minutes later his put his Orion nosed down and descended through the
darkness. As they passed through scattered clouds the captain could see
the yellow and red of two burning ships reflecting off the water all
around. “Well, at least we’ll have pretty constant illum,” he commented
to his copilot darkly.

They leveled off at a thousand feet and banked into their first sonobuoy
run. The boys in back had selected a star pattern for their drops. Over
the next few minutes the pilot flew back and forth, using the burning
ships as his aim point each time. As the men in back dropped the sensors
out of the aircraft’s launch tubes, the pilot called in to *Ike* what he
saw of lifeboats in the water around the stricken frigates. Then, their
buoy pattern complete, he banked his bird into a gentle circle around
the sensors.

After several minutes, Trident Three-One’s lead sonarman called over the
intercom, “Sir, I’ve got something on buoy one-three. It’s faint, but
getting stronger, above the layer...getting stronger...sounds like an
SSK...OK, now I’m picking him up on buoy one-two...definitely a contact
sir.”

“How far from the wrecks?” the pilot asked. One of the pyres had by now
disappeared beneath the waves, extinguishing one of his markers.

“Maybe one mile, south,” answered the sonarman, “definitely far enough
for the MAD gear...signal strength on one-four decreasing...sounds like
he’s going to pass right by one-three. If I had to guess I would say he
passed right beneath and between the two wrecks, sir.”

“Ok,” said the pilot, “let’s give it a look-see.” He increased his bank
and flew directly over the remains of the *Vasco de Gama*, which was
just now joining her sister in slipping beneath the waves, on a direct
course from there to the relevant buoys.

“Sir,” the sonarman called, “I’ve got an ID from buoy one-three. I’m
calling it a *Kilo*, doing three knots. Real hard to hear...he’s got to
be about right next to the buoy, sir.”

The pilot nodded as he leveled into his vector. A few seconds later he
heard “Madman, madman! Flares away!” A line of red magnesium flares
dropped from the P-3C, marking the location and projected course of
their target. The pilot waited for several more seconds, then banked
sharply to starboard. “No messing around,” he said, “lets line up this
som’bitch and let him have it with both barrels. I want two torps on
this guy.”

“Roger sir,” the copilot said.

The Orion came around and the pilot lined up his course with the line of
flares now bobbing in the water. “Let’s put these right up his ass,
Frank,” the pilot said to his copilot. The other man nodded grimly. When
they were a quarter mile from the first flare he ordered, “Now, now,
now!”

“Weapons away!” crackled the intercom. The four-engine plane lifted
slightly as the two Mk-46s dropped out of the open bomb bay and splashed
into the water.

Aboard the (also unimaginatively named) *K-439*, another *Kilo*-class
diesel boat, the Soviet captain had just been congratulating his crew on
a well-executed attack, ignorant of the aircraft above, when his
sonarman screamed, “Captain! Two torpedoes, directly behind us!” Where
had they come from?

“Range?” he demanded.

“Very close, captain!”

His blood ran cold. “Flank speed! Hard to port! Deploy countermea...”
his order was cut short by two rapid-fire explosions that knocked him to
the deck and caused the lights to go out. Emergency lights came back on
a moment later, but he could already hear water rushing in the
compartments aft.

“Sir!” his executive officer called from his station. “We have heavy
flooding in the battery room! We won’t be able to control it. Engine
room is not reporting.”

The captain’s survival instinct took hold. He knew what he needed to do.
“Emergency blow! Get us to the surface!”

*K-439* broached the surface of the Atlantic in a froth of foam and
bubbles. Moments later her hatches flew open and men began to tumble out
onto the deck, some dragging survival rafts with them. These yanked the
lanyards on the capsules and the rafts hissed into shape. Sailors
clambered in as the small submarine began to sink back beneath the
water.

The Soviet captain waited until he was the last man in the control room,
but not a second more. The feet of his XO were in his face, even kicking
him once, as he climbed the ladder through the boat's sail. Looking up
he could see stars through the opening past his XO’s back. Then water
began to spill down the shaft. He climbed faster and emerged into the
open air just as the water pouring down became a cascade. He pushed up
off of the last rung and felt his command sink away beneath him. Then he
was swimming.

But not for long. Hands reached down and pulled him into a crowded raft.
After gathering himself, the captain looked around. It appeared most of
his crew had gotten out and were bobbing upon the waves in the crowded
rafts around him. He ducked as a large four-engine plane roared over
them out of the dark, then looked up again to see an odd sight to the
north. Another flotilla of rafts, crowded with figures, was paddling
towards them, shouting what sounded like insults. In Portuguese. They
looked to be about half a mile away. The survivors from those frigates,
he thought. This was going to be an interesting night.

Post 5

0400 20 February

“Sir,” Rear Admiral Grundal heard his flag lieutenant say, “ASW screen
commander reports that Trident Three-One confirms a kill on a
*Kilo*-class sub. He says they watched it surface and the crew
evacuate.”

Grundal nodded. The loss of the Portuguese ships had been a blow, but
otherwise things were going well. *San Jacinto* had called in a kill
east of Gibraltar, the Spanish were claiming a *Victor* off Cape
Trafalgar, and now they had bagged another, though at the cost of two
valuable frigates. TG *Detroit* was making good speed from Cadiz to
catch up with him, and TG *San Jacinto* was just now passing the Pillars
of Hurcules. Once through, they would go to maximum speed to catch up as
well.

Making him feel more confident was the dark knife-like shape of a
warship joining his formation right now. The Portuguese frigate NPS
*Corte Real*, a new and modern *Vasco de Gama*-class frigate, was
pulling into line in *Ike*’s wake. The number of his escorts was up to
three, and the screen commander was already at work overcoming the
language barrier to work *Corte Real*’s two Lynx helicopters into his
patrols. The line of four ships continued north at 15 knots.

Grundal was about to go to bed when another officer reported, “Sir, one
of the Soviet RORSats will be passing overhead in just a few minutes.”

The admiral had forgotten about this. Norfolk had warned him that the
Air Force had run out of ASAT missiles before the Soviets had run out of
replacement satellites and boosters. There was nothing to be done. That
bird was going to see his ships. “Roger. I’m turning in. Wake me in
three hours.”

-----

Thirty minutes later, aboard *Pskov*, Captain 2nd Rank Matros was
awaiting the report from his communications officer. The man hurried
into the control room with the message and handed it over. Matros
grabbed the printout and walked over to the plotting table, reading as
he went.

Aha, he though, plotting the latest position of the American carrier
group, so he is angling west. No matter, we can still intercept him
easily. “Helmsman,” he called, “alter course to three-zero-zero.” That
ought to do it.

More troubling to Matros was that the satellite report via fleet
headquarters in Murmansk had shown a third escort with the carrier. The
Americans were reassembling their battle group. He needed to get at that
flattop before the screen got any stronger.

“Helm,” he said, “increase speed to ten knots.”

Post 6

0730 29 February

“Base, this is Perseus Five,” called the pilot of the 42 Squadron RAF
Nimrod, patrolling 350 miles west of Brest, “that’s the last of our
buoys, mate. We’re down to fifteen minutes until bingo fuel. Be heading
‘ome soon.”

“Roger, Perseus Five,” came the response. “Stay on station until Bingo.
Your replacement is having engine difficulties at the moment.”

The crew of the Nimrod had been flying back and forth across this patch
of ocean for half the night trying to sanitize a path for HMS *Forth
George*, several hours out of Portsmouth, to eventually link-up with
that Yank carrier. They were all ready to be out of their seats and in
bed. All 120 of their passive sonobuoys were now in the water in a field
that spanned dozens of miles in every direction. They were ready to hand
the data links off to another crew and be done with it. Their fuel stare
would dictate their departure soon regardless. So far, they had heard
nothing but whales and fish.

Just then the pilot heard, “Sir, I’m picking up something on Jezebel
Four-Four...getting stronger...it sounds like twin screws sir.”

“Should we head over and check it out?” asked the copilot.

“Not enough fuel,” said the captain, only half relieved. “We’ll stay
here as long as we can and monitor the signal, but with no replacement
we’ll have to abandon it eventually.

Five minutes later the sonarman in back was ready to give his judgment.
“Sir, it’s an *Echo II*. He’s passing right next to the buoy, heading is
northwest to southeast. Making about five knots.”

“Get a contact report off,” ordered the captain. “And find out when our
relief is expected. We’re going to lose him if we wait too long.

-----

Aboard *Eisenhower*, Admiral Grundal was up, groggy, and trying to sip
down a steaming cup of coffee as fast as he could while his flag
lieutenant updated him on the situation that had developed over the past
three hours.

“...and sir, that’s about it. The convoy system is in full swing. We
have our first one exiting the Med this morning, another is two hours
our of Brest, and you know about the situation on the north Atlantic. We
have a few hangers on who are refusing to wait for the convoys, and it’s
costing us. About an hour ago we got a call from the Irish coast guard.
A container ship trying to make its own way, the SS *Wild Rose*, was
just torpedoed ninety miles of the southwest coast of Ireland.”

“Anything we can do to help them?” asked Grundal, still trying to wake
himself up.

“No sir,” answered the lieutenant. “Not to be harsh, but they took their
chances when they sailed without escort. The Irish say they are trying
to get someone out there, but honestly there’s no one nearby, except
whoever sank them.”

The admiral nodded, then said, “Well, *Wild Rose* did us one service, at
least.”

“What’s that, sir?” asked the aide.

“Now we know there’s at least one Russki up there waiting for us.”

The lieutenant nodded as a petty officer came in and handed him a
message. The lieutenant read it and said, “Make that two Russkis, sir.
The Brits are reporting that they had solid contact with an *Echo II*
about thirty minutes ago at the south end of our assembly area, but
weren’t able to prosecute. They have a bird *en route* to try to
reacquire, but they lost him for now.”

“How did they manage to lose an old rust bucket like that?” asked
Grundal in frustration. The *Echo II*s were old, but depending on the
model one could be carrying eight SS-N-12 missiles, and those could be
nuclear.

“The Nimrod ran out of fuel and had to head home,” explained the aide,
“and its replacement had mechanical difficulties.”

The admiral grumbled but knew it was inevitable. Everyone had been
running on all cylinders for nearly a week now. Both machines and men
were starting to break down. “Anything we can do?”

“Sir, we could send our on-station P-3 up there, but he wouldn’t be able
to stay long. And it’s really too far for our S-3s.”

Grundal swore under his breath, then said, “Well, we’ll just have to
hope the Brits can reacquire him, and find whoever torpedoed *Wild
Rose*, hopefully before we get up there.”

Post 7

0830 20 February

Commander Pimms, the captain of HMS *Churchill*, the old Royal Navy
submarine patrolling the *Eisenhower*’s assembly area, munched on a
breakfast of fried bread and bacon as he sat in his command chair.
*Chruchill* was about a hundred miles of the southwest tip of Ireland,
her crew trying to ensure no one was around to disturb the Americans’
arrival or their replenishment operations.

Right now, that task appeared to be easier said than done. Pimms’ crew
had been tracking a faint ambiguous contact to the southeast when they
had heard the death of SS *Wild Rose* to the north. The commander had
made the decision to turn that way and investigate, but over the past
several hours he had detected nothing. Now the contact to his south was
back again.

“Richard,” the captain said to his XO, “let’s go to communication depth
and see if we can’t ring up some support, shall we?”

A few minutes later the radio transmission burst into the ether with the
message that HMS *Churchill* was in the vicinity of at least one and
possibly two enemy submarines.

-----

Perseus Two, the Nimrod patrol aircraft that had belatedly replaced
Perseus Five in the hunt for the *Echo II* along *Eisenhower*’s
projected course, circled the location of the last beacon to have heard
the Russian. The enemy’s last heading had been estimated as to the east,
and the captain decided to search in this direction, dropping another
line of buoys as he went. These failed to detect anything, even after
the aircraft had traveled a much farther distance than the *Echo*
possibly could have covered in the time since they had lost contact.
That was not good.

Just then over the radio he heard, “Perseus Two, be advised, HMS
*Churchill* to your north reports two possible contacts in their
vicinity. They give their locations as...” the voice gave the
coordinates. “We leave it up to you as to which threat to prosecute
first. They will all need to be dealt with before *Fort George* and the
Americans arrive tomorrow.”

The pilot considered, then answered, “We’ll stay here for now. The
missiles on this *Echo* are the greater long-range threat, and the
longer we let him go the harder he will be to find.”

“Understood Perseus. St. Mawgan Base out.”

The pilot turned the Nimrod south and started laying another pattern,
trying to cover the likely course towards the American carrier, though
the flattop was still hundreds of miles away. After nearly an hour of
searching, they still had nothing. The pilot was growing frustrated.
Soon he would be running out of fuel as well, without even getting a
sniff of the solid contact Perseus Five had made, nor giving HMS
*Churchill* any of the support her captain had requested.

“Ok,” the pilot decided, “let’s go north to *Churchill*. We’ll lay a
line of buoys along the way so that if the *Echo* went north as well, we
can at least track him if he moves back west.”

The Nimrod banked and settled onto a northerly course, dropping SSQ-905
Jezebel buoys at regular intervals along the way. After about ten
minutes the chief sonar tech in back called, “Sir, I’ve got him! We just
dropped one right on top of him. It’s definitely him sir. He went north,
not south”!

Immediately the pilot banked his aircraft around to conduct a MAD pass.
The sensor fixed the enemy sub on the first flyover, and from there it
was only a matter of time. Two MK46s sent the aging Soviet
cruise-missile submarine to the bottom without further drama.

“Call up St. Mawgan,” said the pilot, “inform them that there is one
less Russian to contest the Americans’ advance. We are proceeding north
to assist *Churchill*.” The copilot called in the report as the patrol
plane continued to fly north. They arrived over *Churchill*’s patrol
area thirty minutes later and began laying another pattern of buoys.

After the initial patterns was in the water, the petty officer in the
back called on the intercom, “Sir, I am reading something off two of our
southernmost buoys, numbers ninety and ninety-two.”

“Could that be *Churchill*?” asked the copilot.

“Most likely not,” answered the commander. “Too far south and outside of
his assigned patrol boundaries. Let’s lay a closer pattern and take a
look.”

Before long the very capably Jezebel buoys had allowed the Nimrod’s crew
to identify the contact first as a Russian SSN, then as a *Victor III*.

“That’s probably the bloke that god *Wild Rose*,” said the copilot
angrily.

“Let’s go get him,” agreed the captain.

They fixed the Russian’s location with their MAD gear and then came back
around, dropping a single MK46. It took the aircraft commander only a
few seconds to ascertain that he had misjudged the drop.

“Sir,” the petty officer called over the intercom, “the contact has gone
to flank speed and is maneuvering...it sounds like the weapon his
heading in the wrong direction...yes, tracks diverging...a miss sir.”

The pilot swore, then brought his aircraft back around. He had plenty of
torpedoes, and each one he dropped meant a few more minutes he could
stay on station.

“We’ll do two MAD passes, then drop two torpedoes,” announced the pilot.

“Roger,” acknowledged the copilot.

This time their aim was true. The captain of the *Victor*, warned by the
first torpedo that he was under attack, maneuvered desperately to shake
the weapons chasing him, but in the end, he only ensured that both
impacted into the boat’s flank, instantly killing every man in the
control room and causing the sub to roll completely onto its side as it
sank into the depths.

The crew of Perseus Two celebrated their second victory of the patrol.
They were low on fuel now and the pilot set a course for St. Mawgan and
home. When they were about halfway there St. Mawgan base called.

“Perseus, do you happen to have any fuel to spare?” the controller
asked.

“About ten percent,” responded the pilot. “Why do you ask?”

“The screen commander for the *Fort George* group just called. They’ve
detected an old *Romeo* boat just south of Plymouth. None of their
helicopters are ready at the moment and they are asking if you could
possibly give them some assistance?” The request was very polite, in a
British sort of way.

“Yes,” said the captain, “if they had a good vector, I think we should
be able to some good.”

So they did. Perseus Two’s pilot adjusted his course to the south,
entering the skies of the western end of the English Channel. Once in
the reported vicinity of the aging Soviet diesel boat they began
dropping a short line of buoys. Before long they had the hapless Russian
pegged. “I wonder how he got all the way down here undetected?” wondered
the copilot as they banked into their attack run.

“It’s a large ocean,” shrugged the pilot.

Killing the *Romeo* felt a little like clubbing seals after their
earlier victories. Two Mk46s dispatched the Russian boat almost before
its crew knew they were under attack. With a thanks from *Fort George*,
Perseus Two turned north for home, its crew ecstatic at what had been a
patrol for the record books. Seven of their nine torpedoes expended to
destroy an *Echo-II*, a *Victor*, and the old *Romeo*. The pilot decided
that the squadron commander would be buying him and his crew drinks at
the pub whenever they could get some down time.

Post 8

The remainder of the day passed relatively uneventfully in the eastern
Atlantic. Admiral Grundal continued to anxiously track the painstaking
progress of his scattered task force. By nightfall the *Detroit* group
was only forty miles astern, almost within support range, but not quite.
After a long day, the Admiral was almost ready to turn in early when he
heard, “Sir, *Vicksburg* reports a faint sonar contact to starboard. Too
faint to identify or give range.”

“This isn’t another pod of whales, is it?” muttered Grundal. One of the
S-3s had earlier in the day expended a load of sonobuoys localizing and
almost attacking a family of the mammals before breaking off,
embarrassed.

“Too early to tell, sir,” the staff officer answered.”

The admiral sat back down, peeved that his trip to his bunk had been
delayed, yet again. He let out a long yawn.

-----

Aboard to *Pskov*, Captain Matros was ecstatic. He had timed his
intercept of the American carrier group perfectly. There ahead of him,
seen through his periscope which was extended just above the water so
that waves lapped into the field of view, was the unmistakable shape of
an American carrier. Of course, it was still far too distant to engage,
but he was here with the perfect weapon to do the job, and the
Americans’ escort did not appear to have been reinforced. He noted the
bearing and range once again, then slapped down the periscope’s handles
and ordered, “Helm, take us down ten meters and continue with this
course and speed. I will inform Murmansk and then we will dive into the
layer to begin our attack run.”

Matros had a healthy respect for the Americans’ ASW capabilities. Which
was why he was thankful that he would not be attacking the American task
group alone.

Minutes later a burst transmission from *Pskov*’s radio antenna shot up
to one of the surviving Soviet communication satellites, and from thence
the information traveled back to earth where it was received at Red
Banner Northern Fleet headquarters. In minutes another message was on
its way back by a very nearly reciprocal route.

-----

Aboard the *Oscar-II* class missile submarine *Voronezh*, barely making
steerage way at communication depth 325 miles west of the northwest tip
of Spain, a communications ensign ran breathlessly into the control room
and handed a message printout to the captain, who sat smoking a
cigarette in his command chair. The captain took the piece of paper with
measured calm, read it, and handed it back with nonchalance. Then, in a
quiet voice he ordered, “Executive officer, battle stations missile.
Prepare to launch all of our weapons. Target azimuth will be
zero-four-zero. I wish for all of our missiles to be in the air in the
minimum amount of time, just as we have practiced.”

The control room sprang into action, with officers and sailors pushing
buttons, turning keys, entering information into fire control computers.
The captain watched with pride. His was one of the elite boats of the
Soviet Navy. He had been drilling these men hard both before and after
the start of the war. He knew his weapons had been held in readiness for
a special opportunity by his fleet headquarters. Now that opportunity
was at hand.

In minutes his weapons officer spoke. “All missiles are in readiness
*tovarich* Captain!”

The captain nodded, stubbed out his cigarette, then said, “Very well, we
will fire from front to rear. All missiles release.”

Seconds later the first two of *Voronezh*’s twenty four big P-700
*Granit* sea-skimming anti-ship missiles exploded out of their forward
canted tubes on either side of the sub’s hull, heading east.

Post 9

Aboard *Eisenhower*, Admiral Grundal was listening in on the ASW net as
the screen commander was just starting to vector an S-3 and a helo onto
the faint contact to starboard when he heard klaxons go off throughout
the ship. Then the intercom blared “Vampire vampire vampire. Battle
station missile, I repeat, battle stations missile. Set condition one
throughout the ship.” The admiral quickly looked down at his tactical
display. There, on the screen, the red chevron symbols of incoming
missiles blinked at him. There appeared to be a stream of them, coming
from the west southwest.

“Well, I guess they found us,” muttered the admiral.

-----

The lead pilot of the two-ship flight of F-14s that had just been
relieved on CAP duty was just turning into his final approach to land on
*Ike* when the controller on the E-2C orbiting to the northwest came on
his net, tension causing the man’s voice to break.

“Swordsman Three, this is Seahawk Three-Three, we have multiple vampires
inbound from the southwest. Count is one-eight and climbing. Break off
your landing pattern and come to vector two-five-zero. You are free to
engage once you are in range, over.”

The pilot acknowledged, then checked his fuel gage as he banked left. In
his helmet he could hear Seahawk Three-Three giving similar instructions
to the two-ship flight that had just taken up CAP station to the north
of *Ike*. His fuel indicator showed his bird was low. He didn’t want to
have to ditch his multi-million-dollar fighter in the sea because he ran
out of gas. On the other hand, his did want somewhere to land that was
preferably not on fire or sinking, or both.

In the back, the RIO was powering up the powerful AN/AWG-9 radar which
they had kept off throughout their entire patrol up to this point. Their
wingmen aboard the F-14 to their starboard, Swordsman Four, were doing
the same. To the northwest, Swordsman Five and Six were just punching
their afterburners and settling into an unfavorably oblique intercept
course with the incoming weapons.

“All Swordman flights, this is Seahawk Three-Three,” crackled the E-2
crewman, “incoming count is now two-four vampires. I repeat, two-four.
Get as many as you can, then break north and south to clear the sky for
*Vicksburg* to do her work, over.”

Swordsman Three’s pilot acknowledged. He knew from his mission brief
that the Aegis cruiser’s missile tubes were only half-full after their
battles in the Med. They desperately needed to thin the herd.

Swordsman Three and Four each carried four AIM-54C Phoenix missiles,
along with two AIM-7s and two AIM-9s. They could potentially do a lot of
thinning. However, the pilot knew from their threat briefs that the
Soviet missiles they were likely engaging now possessed their own
jammers and ECM and would be streaking forward at wave top level.
Certainly not ideal conditions for long-range missile fire. Swordsman
Five and Six were in an even more unfavorable position, coming at the
enemy weapons from the north so that the missiles were crossing their
front from right to left. But they had no choice. They needed to engage
as quickly as possible and then get out of Vicksburg’s way.

“All right,” Swordsman Three’s RIO, “I’m getting some good returns off
the vampires...getting some interference from the jamming...I’ve got
lock, we’re good to launch!”

The pilot mashed his trigger and said, “This is Swordsman Three, Fox
Three!” Then he called to his back seater, "give me another one, let’s
get the Phoenix’s away fast.”

They repeated the sequence three more times until their big,
fire-and-forget radar-guided missiles were all gone. Out of the right of
his canopy the pilot could see his wingman doing the same, trails of
fire streaking into the night sky and lofting towards the fading pink
horizon.

Of the eight AIM-54’s launched by the flight, five connected with an
incoming missile, smashing them into the waves only meters below in
flashes that were visibly even from two dozen miles away. Nineteen still
inbound. The missiles from the northern pair of fighters did not perform
as well. With the oblique angle of attack, only three of the missiles
connected, and these two F-14s would not be able to make another
intercept with their Sparrows. Sixteen.

As the *Granit*s passed within thirty miles of the F-14 flight, the
pilot launched the first of his two Sparrows with a “Fox One!” His
wingman did the same. Only one of the AIM-7s connected, and now the F-14
jocks were in Sidewinder range. Fifteen.

Both pilots dove towards the oncoming P-700s, giving their AIM-9s’
seekers the best possible opportunity to lock onto the hot missiles
against the background of the cool ocean. The pilot targeted one of the
lead missiles, squeezed his trigger, and called “Fox Two!” He then did
the same for one of the trailing enemy weapons. And then he was beyond
them, banking south.

“Good job, Swordsmen,” called the E-2’s controller. “We still have
twelve inbound. Now get out of the way and let *Vicksburg* do her
thing.” The pilots needed no encouragement.

-----

Admiral Grundal watched from the forward-looking windows of the flag
bridge as the dark shape of USS Vicksburg lit up with fiery tails
streaking upward, then nosing over to the left. Missile after missile
departed the cruiser in rapid succession, leaving a cloud of smoke to
waft behind her and float over Ike’s flight deck.

On the tactical display screen the Admiral could track the progress of
the battle as *Vicksburg*’s SM-2 missiles flew on an intercept arc with
the oncoming P-700s. There was an *Oscar* out there with empty missile
tubes, he knew. Grundal had every intention of hunting that sub
down...if his carrier survived this attack.

Two SM-2s targeted each oncoming Soviet missile. Some missed, but most
did not. The admiral watched with satisfaction as one enemy missile
symbol after another disappeared from the screen. Then his satisfaction
turned to concern as he saw that two of the sea skimmers had leaked
through and were on an intercept course for the carrier. The admiral was
about to open his mouth and say something about the threat when he
jumped at a flash and a tearing roar, seemingly just outside the flag
bridge. Confused for a moment, the admiral gathered himself and then
looked out the port window to see the last of four Sea Sparrow missiles
leave Eisenhower’s launcher. These four closed the deal, knocking down
the last Soviet missile six miles from Ike.

Grundal let out a breath. He’d been sleepy before the attack. He was
wide awake now. He turned to a staff officer and said, "that was closer
than I would have liked. Call *Vicksburg*. I want a report on her
missile stocks.”

Moments later the staff officer came back and said, “Sir, *Vicksburg*
reports her magazines are at one quarter capacity. Her skipper says it
will be close if we have to fight off another one like that.”

Grundal nodded. *Vicksburg* had fired off more than half of her
remaining SAMs. They had been fortunate that four F-14s had been
airborne at the time of the attack, two in their landing pattern. Had
that not been the case things might have been even more hairy.

Then the admiral remembered something else. “What’s the status on that
sonar contact to starboard?”

“We lost it, sir,” his ASW officer reported. “The aircraft had to wave
off to clear the airspace for the missile fire. They’re heading back now
to recommence the search.”

Post 10

Aboard the *Sierra-II* class submarine *Pskov*, Captain Matros had
listened to the updates from his sonar operators as they reported the
sound of missiles launching on bearings to the NATO escort ships. His
hopes had soared momentarily when the chief sonarman had reported four
rapid-fire explosions from the carrier’s bearing, but they had quickly
realized that these must have been outbound defensive missiles rather
than missile impacts. Matros had waited pensively a few minutes more,
hoping to hear the impact of one of *Voronezh*’s missiles, but in the
end there had been silent.

Disappointed but not deterred, Matros had gone back to directing his
approach towards the enemy ships. At the very least he was counting on
the missile attack to have diverted the American defenses long enough
for him to get close enough for his own attack on the carrier. *Pskov*
quietly glided west, using the thermocline layer to mask her sounds.

-----

“Well,” Admiral Grundal said testily to the ASW commander over the
ship-to-ship radio, “I don’t care if you never identified it. That lost
contact to our east was too close for comfort. You need to re-establish
contact and either confirm or deny that it is a threat.”

“Roger, sir,” responded the captain over the net, “all I’m saying is
that we never got a good fix on it before the missile attack. We had a
decent bearing but no range. The area we have to search is much larger
than id’s like, in addition to being too close to *Ike*.”

“What /assets do you have assigned to the mission?” asked the admiral.

“Right now, sir, I have two helos and an S-3 combing the area. The
*Detroit* group is close enough now, it would be helpful if we could
pull one of their birds onto this as well.”

The admiral considered, then said, “Done. I’ll also call the P-3 down
from up north to assist you. That *Oscar* that attacked us had help, and
my gut says there’s a Russian attack sub out there that was providing
it. Stay on it! Grundal out.”

-----

Several dozen miles north of Ike, the crew of the P-3 with call sign
Tridents Four-One received their orders to suspend the sweep north along
the course of the advancing carrier and take up station to the flattop’s
east. The pilot immediately banked and settled onto a southeasterly
course.

Already performing a complicated dance in the anticipated area of the
lost contact, one US and one Portuguese helicopter were taking turns
dipping their sonar into the water, listening, and then moving to a
different spot to repeat the process. Further out, the crew of the S-3,
Checkmates Three, was dropping some of its limited supply of buoys.
Their pattern of operation was intended to start on the outside limit of
where the contact could be and then work inwards.

Checkmates Three was just banking after having dropped a buoys when the
tech in the back called over the intercom, “Hey captain, I just had
something peg the needle on the MAD gear. Wasn’t very strong and I
almost missed it. Can you come back around over the same spot.”

“Sure thing,” the pilot responded, continuing his turn until it was a
complete circle.

A moment later he heard, “Madman, madman! Positive contact!” over the
intercom. Instinctively he released smoke and banked to come around
again. It was certainly unusual to get a MAD contact hearing it. He
checked his position, and his jaw clamped.

“Ok,” said the pilot. “Listen up. Whoever this is, they’re barely
thirteen miles from Ike. That’s too damn close. I’m bringing us back
around. I want two buoys, a passive one first and then an active one.
We’ll try to straddle the contact. If we can identify we’ll come back
around and drop on the next pass.”

Checkmates Three circled again and the pilot lined up with the smoke he
had dropped moments before. As he overflew it he called, “Drop now!
Now!”

Two cylinders fell from the S-3s belly and splashed down into the water.
The first one descended to its assigned depth and began listening. The
second one sank as well, but its function was different...

-----

“Captain!” called the lead sonarman aboard Pskov, “High pitch pinging to
our front! It sounds like an aerial buoy!”

Matros’ jaw clenched. An active buoy meant they had found him somehow.
He needed to close the range with the carrier quickly now. His torpedoes
could cover twelve miles at fifty knots, but launching at extreme range
would allow the American warship to outrun the fish. “Helm, turn twenty
degrees right and increase speed to ten knots!”

-----

“I have a definite contact on Active One,” called the S-3 crewman.
“Appears to be on a northwesterly course...Passive Four coming
online...I have screw noises...definite SSN...you’re sure it’s not one
of ours, sir? This guy is quiet.”

“*Boston* and *Albuquerque* are supposed to be far to our north. No
other NATO SSN’s are supposed to be operating in this area. We’ll come
back around and drop two more passive buoys to try to get an ID.”

“Aye, sir,” acknowledged the tech.

The pilot checked his chart. Twelve miles to *Ike*. Too close. If that
was a Russian and he had missiles...

Two minutes later two more buoys were in the water, and the two helos
were standing by to assist but staying out of the way of the faster S-3.
“Ok, sir,” said the tech, “I can confirm he’s not one of our boats. If I
had to guess, I’d say he’s a *Sierra*.”

“You guess or are you sure?” asked the pilot, an edge creeping into his
voice.

“Sure enough, sir,” the man said coolly. The pilot nodded.

“Ok, we drop on him on the next pass.”

Checkmates Three came around again. This time when the Viking settled
into its course a Mk46 torpedo dropped from the aircraft and into the
water, directly behind the contact.

-----

“Captain!” Matros heard. He already knew what was coming next. “Torpedo
in the water! directly astern! Range is very close!”

The captain slammed a fist into the navigation chart. He had been so
close! Just a few minutes more and he could have launched a devastating
spread of torpedoes. Could he still get there?

“Helm,” Matros ordered, “all ahead flank!”

-----

“He just hit the gas, sir,” came the report from Checkmate Three’s back
seater. “Torp is closing...he just launched countermeasures...and
impact!”

-----

The last thought Captain Matros had as the wall of cold water swept into
the control room was “so close!”

Post 11

Admiral Grundal breathed a sigh of relief as the replenishment ship USS
*Detroit* pulled alongside *Mighty Ike*. The run-in with the *Sierra*
and that *Oscar* had been too close for comfort. *Vicksburg*’s magazines
had been nearly empty and he had not been confident about his ability to
repel even one more missile attack. Now, in the gray light of dawn, he
could look out over the top of Detroit and see the comforting knifelike
shape of USS *Arleigh Burke* surging forward to take *Vicksburg*’s place
as primary air defense ship. The new destroyer’s magazines were not as
deep as the *Ticos*, but at this moment they were full, and full missile
tubes trumped empty ones any day of the week.

Also with *Detroit* and *Arleigh Burke* had come the older
nuclear-powered cruiser USS *Virginia*, the *Perry*-class frigate *de
Wert*, and the Spanish frigate *Numancia*. This is starting to look like
a real battle group again, thought the admiral. The formation was in the
process of transitioning from a column formation to a more traditional
circular one with the carrier at the center.

Grundal looked down to see fuel hoses being passed over the short void
separating *Detroit* from *Ike*. The aviation fuel from the
replenishment ship was welcome. Even more so were the air-to-air weapons
being ferried over in sling loads by *Detroit*’s two UH-46D Sea Knight
helicopters. *Eisenhower*’s air-to-air magazines had been almost as low
as *Vicksburg*’s SAM inventory. Big Phoenixes, little Sidewinders, brand
new AMRAAMs, all made the trip over in their packaging crates slung
under the twin rotor choppers.

The admiral knew he couldn’t relax yet. Replenishment was a period of
vulnerability for the carrier as his flight operations were curtailed to
speed the resupply. But if he could just hang on for the few hours it
would take to top off his stores, then his other *Tico*, USS *San
Jacinto* would have caught up, and he could send *Vicksburg* to Brest to
refill her VLS tubes. Even better, he would get his squadron of F/A-18s
back from Rota, where they were even now finishing their upgrades to be
able to fire the wonderful new AMRAAMs that everyone up north was raving
about. Even better, another squadron of Hornets was even now inbound
from Norfolk, getting ready to tank over the central Atlantic. If they
could hold on for just a few more hours the admiral knew he would have a
fully assembled carrier battle group with which to go after Iceland.
Based on the reports coming from *Enterprise*, he was going to need it.
