**Pacific Fury 6: Priorities**

20 Feb 1994, 0400 Zulu, 1200 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\pf\pf6\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.875in" alt="US Air Force B-52 Drops Record Number of Precision Bombs on Taliban" />

Your Combined Task Force (CTF) 165 is the centerpiece of the newly
formed Southeast Asia (SE Asia) Command consisting of units from
Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines,
as well as the UK and US. Located in Darwin, the HQ is mostly made up of
Australians, but the international numbers are growing quickly.

For the past four days your staff have been planning a series of strikes
against the Soviet Base at Cam Ranh Bay Vietnam as a cover for sending a
convoy north to resupply Hong Kong. The centerpiece of the operation was
to be the US aircraft carrier ***Abraham Lincoln*** as it transited from
the Indian Ocean to the Western Pacific. Four hours ago, that all
changed! Although your mission remains, the US carrier group will be
steaming through at high speed to counter a potential amphibious threat
in the North Pacific.

You are now left holding the proverbial ‘bag’ and scrounging resources
from everywhere you possibly can.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\pf\pf6\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.43819in" alt="MiG-21 will still serve: Vietnam intends to turn decommissioned fighters into drones" />

**<u>Pacific Fury \#6</u>** is a challenging scenario in several ways.
Initially the player needs to plan a major air strike operation using
short-ranged aircraft over long distances. Many of the aircraft are
older, day-use only with poorly trained pilots, most but not all are
able to refuel from the very limited supply of airborne tankers. The
next challenge is time, many of the resources available are only
available for a limited window of opportunity. Finally, there is the
enemy and the probable enemy of Vietnam, currently neutral but likely to
react strongly to a strike on the Soviet base, this won’t be the first
time that US B-52s face Vietnamese Migs.

And of course there is the convoy to Hong Kong that must get through.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\pf\pf6\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.62986in" alt="Suez Canal queue tops 230 vessels, Ever Given still stuck | Haulage News" />
