**Northern Fury 41 Tour de Force**

18 March 1994, 0800 Zulu, 0700 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf41\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.64306in" alt="A couple of ships in the water Description automatically generated with low confidence" />

You are in command of Strike Fleet North (STRIKFLTNOR) and control all
naval and air /assets north of the GIUK gap and above the Arctic Circle
in Norway. Your boss, Admiral Falkner commanding Strike Fleet Atlantic
(STRIKFLTLANT) from shore at Faslane Scotland has given you his command
ship (USS Mount Whitney) and most of the offensive power of NATOs
Atlantic Fleet.

You’ve just wrapped up **Operation Thor’s Lightning** with a two-carrier
strike on the Command and Communications structure in the Narvik area,
but we’re not ready for the next major operation yet. You’ve been
informed that the amphibious/airborne operation planned for northern
Norway is at least two weeks away. Therefore, you have the problem of
keeping the pressure on the Soviets without risking any major losses. Of
course, *Ivan* will see this as an opportunity to strike back, he still
has lots of ways to do that.

Your role in this scenario is one that is seldom depicted in CMO, that
of a ‘holding action’. You are not on the defensive, but your offensive
actions need to be limited and have the general effect of tying the
enemy down for the next 10 days. Physically, you have the capacity to
restore cave-dwelling as an acceptable way of life in north Norway – but
that would be counterproductive and not fit the overall plan of action
for the next month. Going on the attack now would expend tremendous
resources, both logistically and in the form of loses, bringing the
Strike Fleet to a much weaker state when it is needed to support the
amphibious operations in a couple weeks. From a *Principles of War*
perspective, you are conducting an *Economy of Effort* operation to
allow Admiral Falkner (and you in later scenarios) to *Concentrate
Force* and *Maintain the overall aim* of the campaign.

This scenario is playable by NATO:

You are commanding a Fleet, there are initially four growing to five USN
Carrier Battle Groups, augmented by two British CVs and first one then
two French CVs. You also have significant logistics forces and one of
your main tasks is to replenish your forces and set up for the next
major operation. In total there are over 120 vessels and 650 aircraft.
The scenario lasts for 10 days and you will receive new intelligence and
further tasks each day.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf41\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.60764in" alt="Theodore Roosevelt, Nimitz Carrier Strike Groups Operate Together in Philippine Sea - Naval News" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#41</u>** is a massive and complex scenario. In
total the player controls nine aircraft carrier battle groups and dozens
of other smaller groups or individual ships. Each day new tasks will
arrive causing a re-shuffle of resources and risk. The Soviets still
have a lot of combat power left to throw into the fight.
