**Northern Fury 29 - Something's Fishy**

9 March 1994, 1830 Zulu, 1930 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf29\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.77778in" alt="A body of water with trees around it Description automatically generated with low confidence" />

The fight in Norway has stabilized over the past few days with the main
Soviet force on the North side of the Trondheimsfjorden, and the
Norwegians defending south of that major water feature. The British
Commando Bde has been withdrawn in preparation for future operation. The
Air Forces in Norway are sparing daily as more and more force is added
on both sides. An attempt to supply elements trapped North of
Trondheimsfjorden flared into a major engagement last night, the NATO
attempt was thwarted by intense Soviet patrolling with heavy losses on
both sides. A major air engagement ensued during the daylight hours of 9
March, and it is widely suspected in NATO that there may be a move –
either an attack or a withdrawal from positions north of Trondheim
tonight. The Soviets have no intention of withdrawing.

This scenario is playable by the Soviets only:

With the entrance of the Trondheimsfjorden closed by the Norwegian guns
at Fort Hysnes, the Soviet Navy has not been able to influence the
situation within the massive fjord. The new commander of the 77the Motor
Rifle Division (MRD) believes that he can correct the failings of his
predecessor by improvising, as such – he has created his own navy!
Although the Norwegians either sank or sailed away in many of the
vessels in the numerous ports captured in the fjord, there is one type
of boat that is so numerous in this area, that a clean sweep was not
possible – fishing trawlers!

You are the commander of the 3<sup>rd</sup> Motor Rifle Regiment (MRR)
of the 77<sup>th</sup> MRD and you have tasked you’re 2<sup>nd</sup>
Battalion to conduct an amphibious assault on the south coast. As you
inspect your troops before they embark on this adventure, you can barely
hold back a retch at the stink emanating from one of these dilapidated
old working boats.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf29\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.32292in" alt="Fishing trawler - Wikipedia" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#29</u>** is quite a different scenario from most
others. The player, using stealth and a risky mode of transport must
gain a lodgement on the southern bank of the Fjord and repel Norwegian
counterattacks supported by artillery and tanks. Success however will
break the stalemate.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf29\image3.jpeg" style="width:4.875in;height:2.91667in" alt="Six naked soldiers catch frostbite in Norway - The Local" />
