In *[Northern
Fury](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07R7BVQ31?ref_=pe_3052080_276849420)*
we write about a world in which the Cold War did not end in 1991, but we
live and work in a world in which it did. I sometimes wonder which
future the average person from 1991 would have considered more
believable: our scenario in which the Cold War went hot, or the reality,
where NATO peacefully absorbed much of the Eastern alliance it once
faced?

Interestingly, while the world has changed drastically since 1991, much
of the equipment [fielded](http://northernfury.us/warsaw/) by the former
Eastern bloc armies has not. I’ve had the opportunity to train alongside
several of these armies over the past few months, and this has produced
some surreal moments for me.

One such moment occurred when my battalion trained with a Romanian unit.
At one point I was directing the maneuver of a company composed of
American Bradley Fighting Vehicles, Romanian tanks (locally produced
TR-85s, essentially T-55 knockoffs), and TAB-77s (BTR-70 knockoffs),
with modern Italian Eurofighter Typhoons providing close air support.
Soviet 1960s, let me introduce you to the American 1990s, and the
European 2010s!

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post22\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.87361in" />

*American Bradleys lead Romanian tanks and PCs into the attack. Photo by
Joel Radunzel.*

A couple of weeks later I was crossing our Abrams and Bradleys over the
Danube River on a Romanian ribbon bridge, while Polish IFVs simulated
suppressing the far bank, all under the direction of a Canadian officer.
Talk about multi-national! Having grown up in a Europe that was firmly
divided between West and East by the Iron Curtain, I’ve had ample
opportunity to feel that the world I’m living in is perhaps stranger
than the one we write about.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post22\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.28056in" />

*American armor, Romanian bridge.*

Another surreal moment occurred as I was driving through an airbase
where some of my unit is currently stationed. This particular airbase
features in Bart’s CMANO scenario, [Mediterranean Fury 1: The Road to
Byzantium](http://www.matrixgames.com/forums/tm.asp?m=4576183). Tucked
away in the weeds and rushes along an access road, I found an aircraft
graveyard that contained the very jets one gets to control in that
scenario; there, MiG-23s and MiG-29s sit rusting away in the grass,
while a few hundred meters away Italian Eurofighters rocket into the sky
to police the skies over the Black Sea (interestingly, the older,
simpler MiG-21s are still active and flying). In the scenario, these
aircraft form a powerful fist with which the player must subdue the
Turks and their NATO allies. Today, the whole airbase is a major NATO
outpost.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post22\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.875in" />

*A derelict MiG-29 and MiG-23 in their final resting place. Photo by
Joel Radunzel.*

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post22\image4.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.875in" />

*MiGs that have seen better days. Photo by Joel Radunzel.*

All this to say, the time that I’ve spent in Eastern Europe has brought
home to me how strange the outcomes of history can actually be. It’s
been fun to explore one possible outcome in our novel and scenarios, and
fun as well to explore the real (and strange) future that actually
played out!

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post22\image5.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.875in" />

*Twin-seat MiG-29UB peeking through the bushes. Can you spot them in Med
Fury 1? Photo by Joel Radunzel.*
