**Italian Navy**

![](/assets/images/nato/it/navy/image1.jpg)

Italy is a maritime nation and one of the premier navies in the
Mediterranean. Much of her equipment is of Italian design, building on a
very long history of shipbuilding. As NATO navies go, Italy’s is
certainly one of the middle power navies, sporting all capabilities but
not very great numbers. Globally her interests are solidly in the
Mediterranean, Red Sea and Indian Ocean where her former colonies give
her some historic linkage. As with many countries, Italy has had some
drastic financial constraints imposed on her forces and her navy in
particular.

Of particular focus over the previous few years is the situation in the
Former Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY); the shattering of the Communist
governments in the FRY and in Albania have created significant turmoil
on Italy’s doorstep and traditional sphere of influence. The influx of
migrants, drugs and weapons across the Adriatic was having a very
negative impact on the Italian Government’s ability to fight organized
crime and thus they fully supported the international communities move
to stop the flow of support to dissidents in the Balkans. NATO
established first **Operation Maritime Guard** in 1992 and then
**Operation Sharp Guard** in 1993 to enforce UN sanctions on the rival
factions in the FRY (Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia etc), and had the side
benefit of intercepting contraband headed for Italy. The Italian navy
was decisively engaged in supporting these operations.

![](/assets/images/nato/it/navy/image2.jpg)
