**Baltic Fury \#1 – Storm the Gates**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Aug 2018</u>**

So that's what Sepals are for...

I'd always dismissed them as the 'poor-man's' navy for choke points
only. But they've got me in threat pretty much the moment I leave dock.
I haven't even hit play yet and already I don't like the things, lurking
smugly there in what is sure to be excellent SAM cover. And those are
only the ones the Russians want me to see. An Aegis cruiser could shrug
them off, but my little patrol boats sure can't.

---

What are you carrying, Emden?? I wish there was a way to say 'Heave to,
or else!'

Not that I really have an 'else' at the moment... I've got at least 140
inbound bogeys, so that's a whole heck of a lot more 'else' than I can
deal with.

---

Survived the first wave, commended myself on my dashing Kormoran
counterstroke, only to find that just as my best fighters have landed to
refuel the orcs are boiling out of Mordor for the second wave. Oh boy,
that's a lotta planes...

Still playing V1.0 and loving it!

---

**SITUATION**

The Russians are coming! The Russians are coming!

Well, we’re heading into a hot war with Russia, and I’ve got to defend
the Baltic. I’ve got some old Drakens with bad Sidewinders, a fair
number of F-16s with a mix of good and bad Sidewinders, some reworked
Phantoms with Sidewinders, and, in an ironic twist, some re-unified
Mig-29s which are actually my best fighter. Their AA-10s will be my best
missile until some Tornadoes start showing up from England in a few
hours. I also have a multitude of strike Tornadoes, a few Alpha-Jets, an
occasional helicopter, and a bunch of Atlantiques.

My navy’s mostly in port, where a large number of patrol boats and
diesel subs are readying. I've got a few diesel subs at sea, along with
two pairs of patrol boats, and some isolated larger ships. I've got some
decent SAMs (HAWKs, and a Patriot) too. It's not a Russian air defence
belt, but it should be useful.

I’m up against the might of the Russian air force, with all sorts of
everything (except, fortunately, Mig-31s), plus their enormous patrol
and missile boat fleet, and somewhere out there lurks a very capable
task group of modern DDs and FFs built around the aging Kynda class
cruiser Grozny. They've also got long range coastal SSMs, which will be
able to attack me all the way out to Zealand.

**THE PLAN**

Going up into the teeth of this will probably be futile. I plan to fall
back out of the forward base at Bornholm, attriting raids where I can,
and probably falling back out of Zealand (Roskilde and Vaerlose AB) too
if necessary. I expect some sort of air-drop or amphibious landing at
Bornholm, and possibly some dirty tricks near Zealand, so my navy will
(for the most part) form up in the rear to be ready to make a strong
attack once heavy enemy forces are detected, and I'm reserving some of
my attack planes to deal with enemy on the ground. My subs at sea will
mostly proceed east, looking for any heavies coming from that direction.
My Atlantiques won't have a hope of surviving in the open Baltic, so
they're sent off to patrol the Skagerrak, except for a few sent on ELINT
duties near Laage. Land based radars are almost all turned off, and
we'll be relying on AWACs as long as we can in the face of expected
Russian ARM attacks.

**PLAY**

As things get under way my surveillance /assets report on the positions
of several merchant ships. It seems all of Poland and Germany are at sea
on a fishing holiday, and there are a number of large merchant ships
transiting the area. Most of them are tanker, bulk cargo, or container
ships, but one is a Ro-Ro, which piques command's interest. It's called
the Emden, and it's heading for the north tip of Zealand. Being dutiful
officers, we've all read our Clancy! Could this be a boat-load of
commies in disguise, ready to pounce on a vulnerable coastal airfield?
Observation helicopters are put on patrol to monitor it continuously,
and the Alpha-jets and some of the Drakens are warned to be ready for
immediate action if it needs to be sunk.

First hostile action comes when ASMs are spotted inbound towards
Bornholm from the east, on a course which would take them over the
island and directly towards the Russian patrol boat on the west. Is this
some convoluted attempt to fabricate a pretext for war? "Missiles from
Bornholm sink Russian patrol boat!" screams Pravda! " Russia demands
immediate occupation of hostile island," proclaims Russian UN
ambassador! The order goes out to shoot them down before any incident
can happen, and it takes several minutes before somebody points out that
some of the Russian missiles can engage ground targets too. Like those
radars directly in the flight path...

The missiles are shot down by the two ready Bornholm F-16s, who then
abandon Bornholm and run for Roskilde, and as this is happening the
official word comes in. It's war.

Not long after AWACS starts detecting large numbers of aircraft headed
for Bornholm, and fighters (4 Migs and 4 Phantoms) scramble from Laage
to intercept. AWACS keeps reporting more and more planes crossing the
Russian coast, with the count well up over a hundred. Just as my
fighters are about to pounce on the first of the Bornholm attackers the
controllers recognize that a large stream of the Russian fighters are
headed for Laage. I'd like to fight, but Laage is far more important
than Bornholm, and the Migs and Phantoms are recalled. Bornholm, and its
last two F-16s are on their own!

The F-16s make it into the air just before the strike arrives, and they
get a few before they flee to Roskilde under afterburner. Surprisingly,
the Stinger gunners do a really good job, shooting down multiple inbound
attackers and damaging more, but the surviving strikers bomb Bornholm,
and do a moderate amount of damage. That's all right, I suppose, since
I'm essentially ceding the island to the Russians. They can fill their
own bomb craters. I don't think I'll be back.

Two huge raids develop after this, one up north against the airbases on
Zealand, and one down south against Laage. I really want to keep Laage
intact, since it houses my best fighters, and a combination of the
recalled fighters, last-minute scrambles, some Sidewinder toting strike
Tornadoes, and F-16s from Skrydstrup do their best to keep the enemy
away. Patriot shots (judiciously managed due to the ARM threat) prove to
be very useful for disrupting the enemy's SARH shots and breaking up his
formations. Despite this I keep getting driven further and further back
by the fighters, and many of the Su-24s launch their Kazoos before I can
get at them. (Fortunately my abundant Sidewinders can deal with those
relatively easily.) The rest press on at very low altitude, getting
ahead of their escorts (who have slowed down to crank). I manage to get
them all, but even my Rolands are in action to do it, knocking off the
last few before they hurry to relocate to new hilltops. Laage remains
intact.

The situation up north is not as good. All I have there are Sidewinders,
not AA-10s, so I'm at a huge range disadvantage. I scramble what I have,
including large numbers of ground attack Tornados with air-to-air
loadouts, and send them in with support from HAWK batteries where
possible. I manage to take a heavy toll of the attackers, particularly
those out front, but it's a costly endeavour. Many Su-24s launch just
before I get to them, and I have to shoot Kazoos instead, and most of
the HAWKs exhaust their ready loadout and get pummelled by ARMs with
target memory. I had thought of pulling back again (and was wondering if
I should have evacuated the Bornholm planes further back than Roskilde)
when I got the message to preserve the Gulfstreams and escort my
officials out. Rotten timing! A few Tornado F3s dash in, having flown
direct from England and now perilously low on fuel after a final
afterburner run, and manage to break up some more of the attack, but
it's not enough. Vaernes and Roskilde are both bombed.

In the final tally I've done very heavy damage to the enemy, especially
their attack planes with close range weapons, but my fighters,
particularly the seven lost strike Tornadoes, suffered to do it. The
three HAWK batteries in the region have been destroyed or rendered
inoperative, and only the fourth down by Stevns Fort is still in
operation. Vaerlose was bombed, losing some soft structures and access
points, but the helicopters in the hardened shelters made it through
safely, and the base is theoretically operational. Roskilde takes
numerous hits, particularly on the hangars at the north end of the
field, but amazingly the two Gulfstreams are intact. For whatever
reason, the attackers chose other targets, or I got lucky and managed to
hit the planes which were assigned to strike that tarmac space. A few
minutes later the first Gulfstream takes off and escapes at low level,
and an hour later its colleague escapes too.

While this is happening, events are moving at sea too. The Rugen patrol,
two brave little patrol boats, decide to strike quickly once hostilities
commence, and dash eastwards towards Bornholm, sinking the patrol boat
there with Exocets. They draw volleys of fire in return, but the RAM on
the Nerz proves to be amazingly effective, shooting down missile after
missile from the incoming barrage. Unfortunately my missiles run out
before theirs do, and the Seeadler takes a hit, and turns to limp home.
The Nerz, however, turns south and plunges into the school of fishing
boats, firing Exocets at the two patrol boats along the Polish shore,
before turning back for home. Unfortunately neither of them make it,
and, isolated and defenceless, they succumb to missile strikes from the
closing Nanuchkas.

My little Danish sub, the Nordkaperen turns to close in on the AGI
that's lurking east of Bornholm, sinking it with little difficulty,
before turning its attention to the swarms of passing missile boats that
are headed west. The British sub Unicorn is also trying to come to grips
with them, but they are charging past at 34 kts, while the pathetic
British torps can only do 35 kts. The missile boats would essentially
have to run over the Unicorn to be in any danger, and neither of the
subs manage to engage any. Instead, the missile boats proceed further
west, and start firing at the Niedersachsen, which has formed up with
the two patrol boats in the area and is now lurking under the protective
cover of the surviving HAWK battery at Stevns Fort. Numerous missiles
are fired at this little group, both SS-N-9s from the closing Nanuchkas,
and even gigantic Shaddocks from the distant Kynda. The missiles are
being fired extreme range at a moving uncertainty zone, so some miss by
several miles. Others are shot down by HAWKs, Sparrows, RAMs, and F-16s
and Drakens and F-4s flying CAP. Almost all the enemy SSMs are expended
against this brave group, and none get through. After this, the Russian
missile boats withdraw, leaving me free to operate in this area.

After the SSM barrage is over, one of my patrol boats rushes north at 40
kts to intercept the Emden. It arrives just as the Emden is about a
dozen miles from the shore and closing. I've got a FLIR equipped
helicopter on station overhead, some bomb and rocket equipped fighters
loitering in readiness, and more on hot pad alert, just waiting for the
call. Itchy fingers rest on triggers. What will those sneaky commies do?
Turn back, that's what! The innocent Emden decides a war zone is a bad
place to be, and placidly turns about and sails back towards the
Atlantic. The bemused pilots watch for a while, before being ordered
home, shaking their heads about paranoia in the upper ranks. The
commander tosses his copy of Clancy in the trash...

The early part of the night has some ongoing skirmishing with Russian
fighters, and the Fort Stevn HAWK makes a good score against enemy
planes which pursue me into its reach. A Russian sub tries snorting in
the Skagerrak, but that's a short-term strategy. My two eastern subs
manage to kill a couple of the slower moving ASW patrol boats, as well
as sinking one Krivak and damaging another. (Good job Nordkaperen!)
ELINT and AWACS start getting indications of emissions from a surface
group coming west along the coast, probably the cruiser group we've been
warned about. The Russian aircraft have landed and are recovering from
their strike, and many of their patrols have been shot down, so now is
the perfect time for a Kormoran counterstroke.

A heavy strike of Tornados with Kormoran and HARMs launches towards the
east, escorted by the almost all of my Tornado F3s, half my Mig-29s, and
a fair number of Phantoms and F-16s. They manage to knock down the
limited number of fighters the Russians have up at the moment, and the
attack moves in. About half of them tackle the SAG, while the remainder
spread out to tackle patrol boats and other targets. The HARM salvo is
instrumental in defeating the SAG, allowing the Kormorans to get through
in good numbers, but the pilots are puzzled. There were supposed to be
four ships in the formation. They only found three. Where was the
cruiser? The other pilots confidently expected to clear the patrol boat
scourge, at one missile per boat, but there are some hiccups in that
too. One of the targets is an alert Krivak, and its SA-N-4s knock down a
surprising number of incoming missiles. Still, they manage to account
for another 15 patrol boats, two Krivaks and a Kanin, so it's a decent
night's work, and they retire in good humour. (They maintain that it was
probably a Russian missile, not an errant Kormoran, which put a hole in
the side of the Solar Star LNG tanker, and the colossal flash which lit
up the night sky two hours later was completely unrelated.)

Partway into the raid comes the announcement that the Poles are being
reincorporated into the Warsaw Pact. Does this mean we'll start getting
engaged by Polish units or air defences shortly? So far nothing's
happening, but it's certainly something to bear in mind.

The Russian calm doesn't last much longer. Some of their Fitters try
making a raid, which is destroyed easily enough, but then we start
picking up ESM indications of something big coming: at least 15 planes
and counting, emitting Slot Back radars. It only takes a few minutes to
tell that there's a massive strike coming up north, and most of my best
fighters have just landed! It's come as you are, with no SAM support,
and only a handful of long range missiles, in the face of the Russian
horde. Most of the battle takes place over southern Sweden, as we try to
hit the SU-24s before they can launch their payload, and the leading
ones (somewhat in advance of their escorts) go down, but then it's into
the cloud, and the ones that go in almost never come out. My survivors
fall back, as Russian cruise missiles stream in, but Drakens (which are
hopeless in dogfights) do quite well against missiles and were well
positioned to catch them all. F-16s dive in on low-level attackers,
killing more Fencers, but having a nasty surprise when the next pack of
"Fencers" turned out to be Fulcrums with their radar off. By the time
it's over I've got 11 beepers going off in southern Sweden and the
Vaernes area, and those are just the ones who managed to eject. I'm not
sure if it was worth it, to defend empty airbases, but I've savaged the
Russian attack planes for a second time, and none of their ordnance
crossed my airbase perimeters.

As dawn approaches the Russians try an un-escorted raid, which gets
eaten alive, and then a tiny (2 attackers!) but heavily escorted (12
Flankers!) attack on Laage. I manage to execute a beautiful wall on that
one, with 8 Tornado F3s engaging at long range, killing the majority,
and then disengaging successfully. At the same time, 2 pairs of Phantoms
circled around behind, to pounce on the survivors who RTBed. My main
surface combatants had formed up into a decent surface group by this
point, and were headed east towards Bornholm when they suddenly had
torps inbound. ASROCs at the suspected launch point produced a kill, to
my surprise, and my group managed to turn and outrun the torpedoes (as
well as putting some Harpoons into ASW patrol craft near Bornholm). A
second anti-shipping strike mid-morning did finally get rid of the
remaining patrol boats, with some of the older SAM-less ones getting hit
with bombs instead of Kormorans. (I'm running low on Kormorans, with no
more in the magazines, but I've still got a force of 18 Tornadoes,
loaded with Kormoran and HARM, to help attack expected amphibious
forces.) As mid-day approached there was some more ASW activity, with
the Unicorn stalking and killing a pair of Foxtrots, and another sub
getting detected and sunk by surface forces near Kiel.

The scenario came to an end with a few Russian patrol craft near their
shores, where I did not want to venture into the SAM zone, and the skies
mostly empty of their aircraft.

**Assorted Observations**

This one's a workout! Tons of planes and action, and lots of weaving and
dodging for a micromanager to play with. It took me just over two weeks
of occasional evening play to finish it. I must admit I was looking over
my shoulder for dirty tricks, a la Iceland, and seeing them where they
weren't. In retrospect, a one-boat invasion of a Danish province of 2.3
million is a far cry from picking on isolated settlements in Iceland.

I hadn't appreciated how shallow the Baltic really is. There are
numerous places where my subs couldn't fully submerge, and the ones
coming out of port actually spent a lot of time cruising on the surface
until they eventually got to deeper water. Sub spotting is not easy in
these conditions, and I never saw any of the four subs in the western
Foxtrot barrier, although I crept through it, and I only met two of the
eastern barrier. (One of which made noise as it was trying to ID a
fish.) I never got to the Romeos. One of the Kilos I met heard me and
shot first, and I only detected one myself.

I never did see the cruiser, despite my searching. After it had expended
all its missiles in very long range shots, it left the group and headed
back to port to reload. I never laid a glove on it.

It was interesting being on the back-end of the missile technology curve
here. Those high-off-boresight AA-11s make closing with planes extra
perilous (and I had to do a lot if closing). Even if you sneak up
behind, they turn a little to beam your shot, and suddenly you've got a
missile coming in head-on. Those long range IR missiles (Alamo Bs and
Ds) are extra nasty too - can't be jammed, can't force them to break
lock, and they can follow you forever.

I sent my cargo runs to Skrydstrup, Aalborg, and Vandel. Everything
which could fly was evacuated out of Bornholm, Vaerlose, and Roskilde,
except for a couple of rescue helicopters.
