**Northern Fury â€“ Decapitation**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Jan 2017</u>**

Wow! Nothing says "you've been working your planes too hard" like a
hangar full of red...

My first strike wave is coming back now, and most high priority targets
have been destroyed (sing the praises of the TALD - Hallelujah!). First
I tried sneaking some TLAMs through the valleys before the strike, and
it actually worked reasonably well. For \~ 27 TLAMs at 2-3 per target I
was able to pick off \~ 8 or so high value targets before engaging the
defences. If I'd gone all in it would have worked better, but I still
have some in reserve for a second attack. For the aircraft strike,
jammers fuzzed things up, TALDs soaked up SA-20s, then SLAMs were able
to deal with the SHORADS at Kef and Ryk, my few HARMs knocked off a
surveillance radar or two, and then the small LGBs did a reasonable job
on the remaining lower priority targets. Then we hastily buggered off
when the SA-20 proved it had reloaded.

I left the emitting central surveillance radar alone for the most part,
preferring to let it see me while I hid behind the ridgeline from the
SA-20, rather than kill it and have everyone turn on like happened in
the previous scenario. I actually think the defences are tougher when
they don't bother to hide, because when they do hide I can often get
munitions close enough undetected to get inside their OODA loop. I
wonder if having one SHORADS radar emiting at each site would be a good
compromise for a more effective defence, preserving some units hidden
while maximizing warning time? I eventually did bomb the surveillance
radar, so now everything's lit up, which was probably a mistake. Some of
the units that lit up seem inappropriate - for example the freighter
turning on its radar to announce its presence seems counterproductive.
(How would it even know?)

The main strike wave did wait for the proper time to cross the line, but
some of my fighters went in early. This wasn't by design. At the start
some of the Russians zoomed out to attack my ASW helicopters, which lead
to a fighter engagement that transitioned northwards as more and more
units were fed into the fight by both sides. No plan survives contact
with the enemy, etc.

Now I'll pull back, recycle my strikers, and prepare for round 2, this
time against a reloaded SA-20 with its radar on from the beginning...
Hopefully I'll be able to deal with it for good, and then run in with
the Greenland bombers to deal with various warehouses etc.

Mission complete!

More air-to-air skirmishing went on while I waited for wave 2, mainly
because I went north to do CSAR 1, and then sent the helicopter's CAP
looking for trouble after the pickup was accomplished. They got the
AN-12, but that Su-24 jammer was made of solid horseshoes, casually
ignoring missile after missile, until it eventually died late in the
game.

The Scranton completed its rampage in the same timeframe. It had already
removed the Sovremenny with Harpoons, and then torpedoed the cruiser,
followed by the two patrol boats, and then headed north to sink the
freighter, before coming back to patrol the Kef/Ryk bay. The AGI was
eventually dealt with by one of the Greenland fighters, and two more
Russian attack subs were detected and sunk when they sprinted near my
surface ships.

Wave 2 went well. I sent most of my remaining TLAMs up through mountain
valleys, and then hooked them W along the N side of the arm towards the
northern SA-20, trying to keep the ridge between the missiles and the
SAM site. It worked too - until the Mig-31s swooped in to deal with
them. Fortunately the very last one popped over the mountain and
flattened the SAM site before it could get shot down. My aircraft
mounted a coordinated TALD and HARM and SLAM strike on the central
SA-20, but the site declined to fire as we got closer and closer and
closer, holding its fire and refusing to waste missiles on decoys. But
then it turned out it was out of missiles after all, having used its
last few to take potshots at the tail end of retreating Wave 1. So much
for my massive carefully planned assault on empty missile tubes! With
the long range SAMs down the rest of the aircraft were able to work over
the remaining targets at their leisure, getting most of them. (Some of
the Hafnarfjordur strikes had to be waved off because the targets were
too close to Civilian buildings. We blew in a few windows, but
fortunately didn't cause major damage before we stopped.)

As this was going on CSAR 2 and 3 were called in. The one in the bay was
fairly straightforward, since the main strike was in progress there, so
there was plenty of support already in place. The one over by
Hornafjordur was another story, very close to three active SAM sites. I
diverted the few strikers I had left on the tail of Wave 2, but that
only gave me 2 SLAMs, 4 HARMs, and 8 TALDs, and that wasn't enough to
pay the price of admission. All were shot down to no effect, even trying
to terrain mask to get in closer. So I sent one helicopter and two EA-6s
in on the deck from the SSE, making sure my jammers and helicopter were
always arranged so they were colinear with the jamming strobe to the
SA-10 and SA-20. As I got closer you could see the illumination radar
flickering orange as the SAM sites tried to engage, but they kept
getting shut down before the missiles could guide all the way. I kept my
F-14s lurking further out on the same jamming axis, and a good thing
too, because I had to pry a pair of Mig-23s off the retreating
helicopter after the pickup was complete.

I kept my SAG as a screen between Kef and my carrier groups, rather than
sending them north on blockade. They had already been useful for
providing jamming support and shooting down a few Soviet fighters that
were pursuing retreating aircraft, and I wanted to keep them in that
role during Wave 2. Besides, the Scranton was already operating up
north, and I had reasonable radar coverage there, so I wasn't worried
about Russian ships sneaking in before I could deal with them. As a
result the SAG wasn't in the bay when the Special Onshore Surprise
revealed itself, which was a Good Thing, especially as I didn't have a
clue that Captain Ramius II as lurking out there as well. Being in the
middle of the bay would probably have resulted in the loss of a ship or
two.

After all missions were done I was able to clear the area just before
the deadline, and returned to the carriers.
