NATO/US Navy/Amphibious Forces/Amphibious Groups/II
MEF**/GCE**![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image1.png)

**GCE**: The 2<sup>nd</sup> Marine Division forms the Ground Combat
Element for II MEF’s operation to retake Iceland. The 2<sup>nd</sup>
Marine Regiment is not involved directly in this operation, they have
one Battalion (2/8 Marines) in the Mediterranean as 22<sup>nd</sup> MEU
who will remain there until re-tasked, and one Battalion 1/8 Marines)
acting as the II MEF reserve pre-positioned in Gander Newfoundland,
while the remaining Battalion (3/8 Marines) secures the three airbases
in Greenland.

Commander 2<sup>nd</sup> Marine Division has grouped his forces into two
powerful Regimental Landing Teams (RLT), reinforcement by 4<sup>th</sup>
Marine Davison has allowed him to attach a Tank Battalion to each RLT
while keeping 2<sup>nd</sup> Light Armored Infantry Battalion as his
reserve. Amphibious support, Reconnaissance, Combat Engineers and Combat
Service Support elements will support both RLTs but remain under
Divisional control. For Artillery support, the two remaining M198
Batteries of 1/10<sup>th</sup> (a Bty is with the MEU in the Med) and
the entire 5/10<sup>th</sup> (24 x M109) will be in General Support to
the Division with the main task of Counter
Battery.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image2.jpg)

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image3.jpg)

M198 Howitzer, three of the Battalions in the 10<sup>th</sup> Marines
have 24 of these 155mm guns
each.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image4.jpg)10<sup>th</sup>
Marine Regiment has four Battalions of artillery. Three of the
Battalions are designated as ‘Close Support’ to the three Marine
Infantry Regiments; however, 1<sup>st</sup> Battalion will deploy to
Iceland with two Batteries in the ‘General Support’ role as these are
not needed by their affiliated Battalions. The fourth Battalion is
equipped with 24 M109 Self Propelled Howitzers, these were historically
retired in 90/91 but retained in Northern Fury, they are the A-3 variant
and not the semi-autonomous A-6 Paladin used by the US
Army.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image5.jpg)

A new and evolving organization in the Division is the Light Armored
Infantry Battalion with around 100 LAV-25 variants. 56 of them are the
standard infantry carrier with the 25mm
Gun.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image6.jpg)![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image7.png)2<sup>nd</sup>
Light Armored Infantry (LAI) Battalion started life in 1984 as the
2<sup>nd</sup> Light Armored Vehicle (LAV) Battalion before adopting its
current name in 1988. It is due to change again to the Light Armored
Reconnaissance (LAR) Battalion later in 1994. The unit has 4 infantry
companies with 56 Infantry LAVs, a TOW platoon with 16 LAV-TOW, 8
LAV-Mortar, 8 LAV Command posts, 6 LAV wreckers and 16 Logistics LAV
variants.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image8.jpeg)

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image9.jpg)

Both 2<sup>nd</sup> and 4<sup>th</sup> Tank Battalions are equipped with
70 M1A1 tanks and 72 TOW missile systems providing some heavy punch to
the
RLTs.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/ground-combat-element/image10.jpeg)2<sup>nd</sup>
Tank Battalion fought in the Gulf War with Viet Nam era M60 Tanks but
exchanged them for the new M1A1s upon returning to the US. In addition
to the 4 tank companies with 17 tanks each, there is an Anti-Tank
company with 72 TOW mounted in HUMVEEs in 3 platoons of 24 each.
Combined this battalion gives significant direct fire capability to the
Division.

4<sup>th</sup> Tank Battalion is part of the USMC reserve. It was the
only USMC unit to deploy to the Gulf War with the M1 and is in need of a
new Motto. The current Motto ’53 Days’ represents the time from
activation to combat in the Korean war. In the Gulf War they were in
action after only 32 days after activation. In this war they were
activated as a precaution on the 10<sup>th</sup> of Feb and will see
combat on the 27<sup>th</sup>, a mere 17 days.
