**Baltic Fury 3, Warsaw Uprising.**

18 Feb 1994, 1700 Zulu, 1800 Local

![ORP Warszawa - ostatni polski niszczyciel - Strona 2 z 3 -
SmartAge.pl](/assets/images/aar/bf/bf3/image1.jpeg)

**You are the commander NATOâ€™s
[BALTAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allied_Forces_Baltic_Approaches)
(Baltic Approaches) Command**. BALTAP is a joint force of land, sea and
air forces arrayed specifically to keep hostile WP forces bottled up in
the Baltic Sea. Your forces are primarily Danish and German reinforced
by British and American air forces. The restricted waters in the western
Baltic funnel hostile forces directly to the island of Zeeland and
Copenhagen itself. Over the past five days the air and sea fight in the
central and western Baltic has been withering. Casualties have been high
with huge stocks of munitions being expended. Since Bornholm was
captured an expanding Soviet presence on that island has forced you to
limit your activities to being largely defensive. Today you plan to
change that.

![German Navy Deutsche Marine Aviation
Marineflieger](/assets/images/aar/bf/bf3/image2.jpeg)

**<span class="underline">Baltic Fury \#3</span>** puts the player in
the position of mounting a major counterstrike to throw the Soviet
juggernaut off balance. Although your forces are adequate, the Soviets
have not been idle and the defences on and around Bornholm have been
bolstered into a formidable problem.

Through the scenario the situation changes somewhat, although the
mission remains, events will transpire to cause the player to re-think
the situation and re-task resources.

![MiG-29A - Polish AF 22BLT
V1.5](/assets/images/aar/bf/bf3/image3.jpeg)
