**Northern Fury 2 AAR**

**By Joel Radunzel**

**First Post**

Here’s the start of my AAR for the second scenario in the excellent
Northern Fury series created by Gunner98 over at Matrix forums. This one
takes place simultaneously to the events in Northern Fury 1: H-Hour, but
a little further east in the Barents Sea. I’m playing the part of the
captain of the Seawolf-class USS Connecticut (SSN-22), the senior NATO
captain on X-Ray Station. What is X-Ray station, you ask? Here’s from
the scenario description:

*“X-Ray Station was a long standing patrol area for NATO submarines
whose job it was to keep tabs on the Soviet Red Banner Northern Fleet,
in particular the major surface units and the SSBNs. Several US and
often UK submarines were on this station for almost 30 years.”*

The X-Ray station patrol area covers the Arctic Ocean north of the Kola
Peninsula and the exits to the White Sea, and West of the island of
Novaya Zemlya (“New World” in Russian). Currently there are five NATO
submarines on station. My own boat, being the quietest and newest, is
covering the patrol sector furthest south, at the exits of the White
Sea. Any Soviet fleet units will have to transit this area to gain
access to open water. However, the strait is covered by a bottom
listening array, so I cannot approach too close. The other four
submarines on station form a southwest-northeast arc consisting of (in
counter-clockwise order) USS New York City (SSN696), USS Boise (SSN764),
USS Baltimore (SSN704), and HMS Trafalgar (S107). Two other submarines,
USS Philadelphia and HMS Churchill, are off tracking Russian SSBNs and
will not take part in this scenario.

Our orders are primarily to sniff for Russian boomers and track them,
but also to report detection of major surface units of the Red Banner
Northern fleet. In the event of war we are to remain on station and
report as the ears of the fleet, and only to take a shot if we can
engage a major Soviet unit under favorable conditions, not likely to
happen up here. These orders and our standard operating procedures on
station were all laid out at a captains' meeting back in Scotland before
departing. It’s now 1300 on 13 February, 1994, and USS Connecticut just
conducted our weekly comms check. It was a bit of a shock, as I was
informed that we are at DEFCON 4, without much explanation.

This would seem a good time for me to explain some “house rules” I've
set for myself in this scenario. I know from the last Northern Fury
Scenario that the war starts at 1300, or right now, but as a submarine
out of communication for long periods of time I wouldn't have any way of
knowing this, and neither would any of the other subs. Furthermore, the
subs can’t communicate with each other. This precludes any sort of
coordinated action, so if I do launch attacks, I will do so with one
boat at a time. As such, I’m also leaving each submarine (except USS
Connecticut) on its pre-plotted course until it detects a target, at
which point I can assume the role of that sub’s captain and respond to
what the boat’s sensors are hearing. Furthermore, none of the submarines
will act offensively until they are either attacked, or detect a major
Soviet unit and go shallow to report, at which point I assume they
receive a message that hostilities have commenced.

Ok, so much for the set-up...

The scenario begins. USS Boise (the only improved 688 boat on station),
creeping southeast at 5 kts, picks up two groups of Russia surface
contacts. One appears to be composed of a destroyer and a frigate
heading west at high speed, about 15 miles west of Boise. Boise’s sonar
operators can’t determine types, since the targets (all other ships are
target to submariners, right?) are too far off, but they inform the
captain (we’ll call him Commander Morgan) that they think they can hear
more screws beyond these two. The other group, about 15 miles northeast
of Boise, appears to be composed of two destroyers, but a third contact
of undetermined type is also there. The sonar technicians estimate they
are also making turns for high speed, probably 30kts, also headed west.
This is unusual activity for the Russians. Morgan thinks about the
situation and reasons that he can turn west, go deep, and conduct a
high-speed sprint to close the range with the western group of Russians
and determine their composition. This will leave his boat is good
position to then turn north and cut across the course of the
northeastern group.

He orders, “Helm, make your depth 750 feet, course 170, speed 32 knots.”

Boise turns, accelerating as she descends.

Unknown to Commander Morgan and the crew of Boise, to their north USS
Baltimore, captained by Commander Daniels, has also detected the
northeaster group of Russian surface ships (though these are southeast
relative to Baltimore). Daniels alters Baltimore’s course to the south,
maintaining a speed of 5 kts, to close the distance between his boat and
the patch of water that the speeding Russians will pass over in about 90
minutes if they maintain course and speed.

Far to the northeast, west of Novaya Zemlya, Commander de Bicardi of HMS
Trafalgar is informed by his sonar operators that they hear what sounds
like two destroyers far to their north heading west at about 20 kts. De
Bicardi orders Trafalgar deep and onto a northwesterly intercept course
at high speed.

It is now 1305. Three of the five subs have contacts that they are
investigating. USS New York City (Commander Beam), and myself on
Connecticut currently have clear sonar scopes. New York City continues
creeping south at 5 kts while I order Connecticut to change course to
the northeast to open up some range between myself and the Russian
listening arrays.

**Second Post**

“Maintain course and speed for two hours,” orders Commander Morgan,
“I’ll be in my state room. Send someone to wake me at 1500 hours.” With
that hw walked the few steps to his quarters, rolled into his bunk, and
promptly fell asleep as USS Boise sped west at top speed and as deep as
the ocean bottom would allow, in chase of the surface targets Morgan
hoped would be there.

Sixty miles to the north, Commander Daniels in Baltimore was coming to
the conclusion that his boat, even at maximum depth, would not be able
to safely close with the Russian surface targets hurtling west at 30
kts. “Helm, take us shallow, course 125, speed five knots. Let’s report
in.”

Daniels walks the few steps to from the CIC to the comms room and
dictates, “When we get shallow, send the following message:”

PRIORITY

From: CDR, USS Baltimore, To: COMSUBLANT

Report multiple REDFLT surface contacts location N 73 1’47”, E 36
48’41”, heading 289, speed approximately 30 kts. Composition 2 DDGs, 1
CG, one other unit. Assessment, REDFLT surface action group moving at
high speed into north Atlantic. Am proceeding to station.

“Let me know if there is any mail from fleet,” he said as he turned and
walked back to his captain’s chair.

Just as he was settling in the seaman in the communications closet
called, “Skipper, you need to see this!” The tone of his voice quickened
Daniels’ step as he moved back to the comms room and grabbed the
Emergency Action Message from the technician, and read:

FLASH FLASH FLASH

From: COMSUBLANT, To: All units, X-Ray Station

At 1313001994 WP forces initiated hostilities against US and NATO forces
around the globe. We are at war, repeat, we are at war. Take all
measures commensurate with the safety of your vessel. Remain on station
and report any REDFLT movements. You are authorized to take offensive
action against any Soviet or WP units you encounter, provided this does
not compromise your primary mission of reconnaissance. More instructions
will follow as situation develops. Maintain current reporting schedule.
End.

Daniels felt a thrill run up his spine and the blood in his veins turn
icy cold all at the same time. Here was what he had been training for,
planning for, waiting for his entire career, to be in the Russians’ back
yard when the Cold War went hot. Now that he was actually here, he
wasn’t sure whether to feel excited or frightened. The he remembered it
wasn’t his job to feel anything. He walked back to his chair, grabbed
the mic from above his head and said, “Now hear this, we are at war.
That’s all the information I have. I don’t know why, or how, or anything
else, but an hour ago those commie Russians decided that we’re going to
have it out old-fashioned like. Our mission hasn’t changed. We’re still
the best boat in the fleet, and we’re still good at doing our impression
of a hole in the water. We just tracked a Russian SAG heading west at
high speed, and our report is going to let our brothers further west get
a warm reception ready for them. Just keep doing your jobs, and one day
you’ll have a sea story that you can bore your grandkids with. That is
all.” He replaced the mic.

Daniels turned, “Helm, maintain course and speed, make your depth 800
feet.” As the helmsman acknowledged and complied, Daniels turned to the
XO and muttered, “there’s going to be subs behind those surface ships.
Wait and see. The whole Northern fleet is going to thundering this way.
We may even be able to pick one off.”

“Yes sir,” responded the XO, as the deck canted downward as Baltimore
descended into the icy Barents Sea.

**Third Post:**

Far to the northeast, Commander de Bicardi in HMS Trafalgar was sipping
at a mug of tea and glancing at his watch in his boat’s CIC. As the arms
on his watch ticked past 1430 (Zulu time) he looked up and in his
clipped, aristocratic accent said, “Very well, I think that’s quite
enough. Slow to five knots and bring us up to a depth of 30 meters, if
you please. Let’s see if we can reestablish contact with old Ivan.”

Trafalgar came up slowly, passing through the thermal layer and into the
roiled waters just below the surface, gently rocking the boat. “Sounds
like rain on the surface, sir, and a bit of a blow,” called the lead
sonarman.

“Any sound of the Sovs?” de Bicardi asked, annoyed.

“Not yet, sir,” came the cockney reply.

“Well, keep at it.”

Trafalgar continued on a northwesterly course for several minutes, then,
“Sir, I’m picking up screws, directly ahead. Not the same boats we heard
earlier, no sign of that one, but this one’s right where they should be,
approximately 15 miles ahead.”

“Well then,” de Bicardi mused, “that makes at least three Ivans. Can you
make out course and speed.”

“Give it some time, sir.”

Over the next quarter hour Trafalgar’s sonarmen worked to make out the
sound of the Soviet ships in the less than ideal surface conditions.
Then the head sonar tech reported, “sir, she’s a Kashin-class destroyer,
almost certain. She sounds to making turns for 25 knots or so. Those
other two we heard two hours ago, those sounded like another cruiser and
destroyer to me. This is where they should be, but I just can’t hear
them sir.”

“Very well,” de Bicardi said, somewhat annoyed. “Sounds like we’ve got a
Russki SAG heading west, though its bloody far north for them. Odd.
We’re already too far out of our patrol area. Let’s get up to
communication depth and tell the fellows back home what we’ve heard.”

Trafalgar ascended and unreeled its tethered comms buoy. In seconds the
burst message was travelling spaceward at light speed, passing another
message being broadcast continuously from the opposite direction, from
the orbiting communication satellite. When it arrived...

“Sir, you need to see this!”

De Bicardi grabbed the printout, read it, and muttered, “Bloody hell...”

**Fourth Post:**

“Sir?”

Morgan blinked his eyes.

“Sir? you asked us to wake you after ninety minutes sir.”

Morgan sat up, slowly remember ring to send USS Boise on its deep speed
run west. “I’ll be on the bridge in a minute sailor.”

Morgan stood up, straightened his uniform, and walked out into the CIC.
The officer of the deck was already slowing to five knots and ascending
above the layer as planned.

“Once we’re above the layer, let’s start a north-south search pattern to
see if we can pick anything up on the towed array,” Morgan said.

For the next several minutes USS Boise trailed her towed array listening
for any sign of the Russians to the west. Morgan had taken his boat well
outside his patrol area on a hunch that there was more to this contact
than a solitary DDG speeding west. Just as his heart was beginning to
sink he hear, “Conn, sonar, I’m picking up screw noises from multiple
surface contacts in the first convergence zone on an approximate bearing
of two-seven-zero. Two early for count or classification. Give me some
time.”

Then, paydirt. “Conn, sonar, one of those skunks sounds an awful lot
like a Kiev-class carrier. I think I can discern one or two DDGs, a CG,
and two frigates that look like they’re acting as flankers north and
south of the main group.”

“Now that’s interesting,” Morgan said to the officer of the deck, a
young lieutenant, “Kiev class up here means either Kiev or Baku, and
they don’t normally just send them charging west at flank speed like
that. Let’s firm up the contact and then go shallow and report. Then
we’ll turn back east and get back on station.”

Over the next half hour Boise’s sonarmen were able to positively
identify the helicopter carrier as being in fact the Kiev, and were also
able to get a firm fix on one of the Krivak-class frigates protecting
the Soviet formation’s southern flank. A few minutes later Boise
ascended and sent off its burst transmission contact report, duly
receiving in return the news that the Russian ships were now targets
literally as well as conceptually.

“Damn,” muttered Morgan. “I’ll bet the rest of the Red northern fleet is
breaking out too. Hope they didn’t manage to get behind us like the Kiev
group almost did. What’s Connecticut going down there, sleeping?”

The captain and crew of the Seawolf-class boat USS Connecticut, almost
200 miles to the south, were not in fact sleeping, but neither had they
managed to detect anything useful in the last two hours, either. Myself,
as captain, had to resist the urge to alter course or poke up to
periscope depth to snoop around. Knowing we are on DEFCON 4 was
disconcerting, and if war did break out you can bet that the Russians
are going to lay so many sonobuoys on this patch of water that you could
cross the exits to the white sea without getting your feet wet. No, stay
deep, stay slow, only minor course variations to throw off a possible
sniff if the Russians can get one. As we head northeast the water
deepens gently until we can unreel our towed array and take advantage of
the convergence zones in the deeper water. After about another hour the
patience pays off.

“Conn, sonar, I have a surface contact, in the second convergence zone,
maybe 30-70 miles, approximate bearing one-six-zero. Don’t know who he
is, but he’s making a lot of noise and moving fast.”

“Roger, maintain course and speed.”

A few minutes later, “conn, sonar, that skunk is definitely a
Kirov-class battlecruiser. I can hear the pump noises on his reactor
plant working overtime. He’s moving out sir. Can’t make out anything
with him though.”

“Well,” I say, “he’s not coming out alone, that’s for sure.” This is an
ominous development. Just three hours ago we essentially received a war
warning, and now one on the major units of the Soviet fleet is rushing
out, unannounced and unscheduled at high speed. I need more information.

“Helm, put us above the layer. Let’s see if we can hear anything else
coming out with him.”

Connecticut ascended to 98 feet, continuing to creep at 5 knots on a
northeasterly course. After a few minutes my fears were realized. We
detected a virtual stream of surface contacts coming north-northwest out
of the white sea. Frigates, destroyers, cruisers, in addition to the
battlecruiser we had heard earlier and then lost when he passed through
the convergence zone. SOme were moving at 30 knots, some 25, some 20,
some 8. “Sonar, let’s start getting this picture sorted out. I want to
know if we pick up any more of their heavies. They got two Kirovs up
here, two carriers, two baby carriers. We need to report if they are
moving or not.”

“Aye sir. No love on any of them yet, but one of these CGs is starting
to sound a lot like one of those new Slava-class cruisers.”

“Got it, this looks like a sortie by a good chunk of the northern fleet.
It’s unlikely that the heavies aren’t there somewhere. Let’s go deep
again, pick up speed and see if we can get in among the stream.”

Connecticut dove and accelerated to 20 knots for 30 minutes, then slowed
and ascended again. The sonar room worked to reacquire the surface
contacts we’d lost during our speed run. Then, an excited voice, “conn,
sonar, I’ve got one of the CVs sir, contact’s firming up, she’s the
Kuznetsov, flag ship of the northern fleet!”

“Give me a proper contact report sailor.”

“Uh, aye sir, relative bearing is about three-four-zero-range about 7 to
10 miles. She’s making turns for I’d say 30 knots, and she has a couple
DDGs and that Kirov in close escort.” Then, “Sir, there’s something
else. There’s a Sovremeny class destroyer about 16 miles south that’s on
a course to pass directly over us if we maintain present course and
speed. I can’t guarantee he won’t hear us.”

I walk over to the navigation chart. We’re in relatively shallow water,
only 600-700 feet. To the east and west the ocean floor is even
shallower, but to the north is a channel close to 800 feet. Every foot
of water over our heads is key to staying concealed.

“Very well, alter course to three-four-zero. Navigator, put us as deep
as we can go here and then increase speed to 20 knots. we’ll dash north
to the deeper water, the dog-leg east to get out of the way of that DDG.
Then we’ll come up above the layer again and have another listen. We
can’t report in and risk detection until there’s some distance between
ourselves and all these Russians, but I have a bad feeling about all
this.”

Elsewhere, things were starting to happen more quickly as well. On board
USS New York City Commander Beam was in his cabin doing efficiency
reports when he heard, “Captain to the conn.” He happily set aside the
paperwork for whatever the welcome distraction could be.

“What is it, Mr. Woodford?” he asked the officer of the deck as he
strode into CIC.

“Sir, sonar reports a submerged contact on the lowed array, dead ahead.
He’s below the layer, only moving at five knots. It’s an SSN for sure,
and not one of hours. Range is maybe ten thousand yards.” USS New York
City was currently moving south above the thermal layer, trailing its
towed array below, making counter detection by the deeper submarine
unlikely at this range.

“All right,” Beam said, “nothing too unusual.” lets alter course to the
east somewhat and swing around behind him to see if we can get a
classification.”

Far to the north, Commander de Bicardi on HMS Trafalgar was just turning
his boat around to creep back south at maximum depth when his sonar room
reported multiple surface contacts in the second convergence zone to the
east. He ordered Trafalgar to turn towards the target and was shortly
rewarded with classifications. This group was more interesting that the
last, consisting of a slew of amphibious transports including LSTs,
LCMs, LPDs, as well as numerous escorts.

“Now this is interesting,” de Bicardi muttered. “Those amphibs are far
out here, aren’t they, and with a war on they can only be headed south,
either for Iceland or the North Sea. Better get a contact report off now
while they’re still distant, then work in and see if we can better a
better count and composition of the group.”

**Fifth Post:**

Commander Beam on USS New York City had a decision to make. NYC was
trailing a nuclear submarine that they were as yet to identify heading
west-northwest at a slow five knots. It was definitely an SSN and
definitely not NATO, but the fact that Beam’s sonarmen were as yet
unable to identify the type at a mere six thousand yards meant that it
must be a newer class of sub. And yet, his orders were to trail boomers
and major surface units, not attack boats, and this one was getting
close to the western edge of his patrol area. So, option A was to keep
trailing the presumed Russian out of the patrol area and try to identify
him, which would be difficult to do since, as a more modern sub, he
probably had a towed array of his own, or option B, to break off
contact, report, and head back to his patrol area in search of more
lucrative targets.

Beam decided to go with option B. New York City ascended to send off a
contact report. The War warning the Beam received in the process made
him mutter, “I guess we’re going with option C.” Then louder, “Weps, we
have a firing solution on that skunk?”

“Roger sir,” the weapons officer said, somewhat startled.

“Well, we’re at war,” Beam said, handing over the message. “Let’s take
the shot. We’re going to be some of the first people to get some shots
in for our side. We’ll launch two fish above the layer and keep them
there until he hears them, then send them down for the endgame.”

Over the next several minutes New York City descended back down to let
its tail hang below the thermal layer and reacquire the target. Once the
tracking party had a good solution Beam ordered, “ Make ready tubes one
and four. Fire on my mark.”

“Tubes one and four ready sir.”

“Fire one. Fire two.”

The two Mk48 ADCAPs launched from New York City’s torpedo tubes and
proceeded above the layer on wire guidance. They ran unnoticed for
several minutes and 55 knots and then, “Conn, sonar, he’s heard them
sir. He just went to full power! It’s a Victor III, sounds like he’s
trying to get to full speed.”

“Send the fish down through the layer,” Beam ordered.

The Soviet sub quickly built up to its maximum speed of 30 knots with
the torpedoes on his tail, trying to outrun them. “No return shots,”
Weps noted, “he had no idea we are here or and no idea where we are now.
H should have at least sent a torpedo back along the bearing of our own
torps.”

“Maybe he’s worried about other Russian subs in the area,” remarked
Beam.

“There is that, sir.”

The Mk48s inexorably ate up the range between themselves and the Russian
sub. The target tried countermeasures, but to no avail. The lead torpedo
smashed into the Victor’s propeller shaft the detonation of its warhead
ruptured the pressure hull. NYC’s sonarmen listened as the other boat
imploded under the pressure of 800 feet of water, then sank to the ocean
floor.

“Scratch one Russki sub. Let’s go find some more.”

Several miles away and several hundred feet above the ocean surface, the
sonar technician aboard a Russian Mi-14 ASW helicopter reported to his
pilot, “Tovarich captain, I just picked up an explosion on buoy 19, and
just a minute ago I thought I heard torpedo motors on buoys 20 and 23!”

“Very well, Vasily, I’ll call the patrol planes and see if we can get
some more buoys over here. We’re out of buoys and low on fuel, but it
sounds like the bloody Americans are down there making trouble. We’ll
see if we can put down a blanket of buoys and see what we can hear.”

“Yes, comrade captain.”

**Sixth Post:**

At the northern edge of X-Ray station Commander de Bicardi on HMS
Trafalgar was maneuvering his boat towards the thundering herd of
Russian amphibious transports and escorts moving west at 16 knots. Over
the past two hours his sonarmen had lost contact with the Russian ships
as they passed out of the first convergence zone at about 30 miles and
then reestablished contact as his boat and the Russian task group neared
each other on reciprocal bearings. At his point Trafalgar’s sonar had
begun to pick up the lead escorts against the background noise of the
rather loud amphibs, and de Dicardi ordered his sub to angle south.

“We shall try to avoid the lead escorts and let them pass, then turn
sharply north and try to run in among the sheep. We will launch a spread
of torpedoes against the largest amphibs, then reload with Harpoons and
launch these to foil any counterattack. Then we will take advantage of
our own bedlam to slip away east,” he briefed his officers in his
maddeningly aristocratic yet professional clipped prose.

As the Russian ships began to pass to port of Trafalgar’s east-southeast
creeping course, de Bicardi’s cockney lead sonarman was able to get a
complete picture of the formation.

“Sir,” he briefed, “the Ivans ‘ave got a strong escort. Up front is a
Krivak-class frigate, an ‘ese followed by an Udaloy, a Kresta-class
cruiser, and two Sovremeny’s leading what looks like more ‘an twelve
amphibs of dif’rent types ‘an classes, all bunched into a tight column
behind the Kresta. Then behind and to the port and starboard of these is
two Kashins bringing up the rear.”

“Those Kashin’s are the weak spot,” commented de Bicardi, “we shall move
into the column ahead of them but behind those Sovremenys. This should
allow us to get among the transports without having to move to quickly
and generate noise. All right, let’s be about it. ‘England expects’ and
all that.”

As the lead Soviet escorts passed abeam of Trafalgar de Bicardi ordered
a turn due north, staying above the thermocline to try to avoid the
Udaloy’s towed array. The Russian transports thundered now on a
perpendicular course ten miles ahead, still well beyond the range of
Trafalgar’s under-performing Tigerfish torpedoes. Over the next thirty
minutes Trafalgar worked northward, passing dangerously close beneath
the southernmost Kashin-class destroyer.

Then, just as de Bicardi and his crew began to breathe easier in
anticipation of the excitement of getting in among the transports, the
cockney sonarman called, “sir! Torpedo in the water bearing
three-three-zero relative! It looks to be about six thousand meters
distant.”

“Calm down, calm down,” admonished de Bicardi. “Helm, be so good as to
make your depth eight hundred feet. DO not increase speed.” Trafalgar
quietly passed under the layer and went deep and quiet.

Chastened, the sonarman reported again after a few minutes, “it doesn’t
have us sir.”

“But they’ve certainly gotten a sniff of us,” mused the captain. “We’ll
have to adjust our plan of attack. Torpedo room, reload tubes one
through four with Harpoons, if you please.” Trafalgar carried only four
of the missiles. “We shall come back up once the Sov formation has
passed and launch on the transports from behind, where they sonar
sensors and air defenses are weakest.”

Over the next several minutes as Trafalgar dove deep the sailors in the
torpedo room labored to remove the Tigerfish torpedoes from four of the
sub’s five tubes and replace them with the four Harpoon missiles. Once
the task was complete, de Bicardi ordered his boat to ascend once again.
By this point Trafalgar, creeping north at five knots, had passed astern
of the Soviet formation, and the individual ships were easily
identifiable on the British sub’s sonar displays.

“Select four of the nearest LSTs as targets for the missiles and launch
on my mark,” ordered the captain.

“All ready sir.”

“Fire!”

Soviet Rear Admiral Stolich aboard BPK Krondstadt, the Kresta II-class
cruiser acting as flagship of the amphibious task force, was nervous.
One of his escorts had reported several minutes earlier that they had
heard what they believed were reactor noises on the southern flank of
his formation. He had ordered a Metel ant-submarine missile launched
into the area to see if they could spook whatever enemy menace was
there, but to no avail. Now he continued westward in the hope that speed
would be his best defense against any NATO submarines that might be
there.

Just as he was reaching for his glass mug of tea set in a metal holder,
and officer on the flag bridge called out, “Tovarich Admiral, missiles!”

One by one Trafalgar’s Harpoons broached the surface and ignited their
rocket motors, temporarily lighting up the dark Arctic sky to the east
and behind the Russian ships. The missiles fanned out from their launch
point, streaking and wave top level towards four of the Russian
transports.

Back aboard Trafalgar, de Bicardi ordered a sharp turn to starboard and
a rapid descent back below the layer to clear datum from the launch
point.

Stolich watched the radar display in horror as the four - there appeared
to be four - missiles streaked west into the rear of his formation. Then
his to Sovremeny destroyers, already on alert from the sniff the
formation had gotten earlier, came to light. It was a race between the
SAMs from his two best air defense ships and the approaching Harpoons.
Missiles leapt off the launchers and first one, then two Harpoons
exploded, shredded by the SAMs’ shrapnel. The Harpoons had been launched
from too close a range, however, and the remaining two bored in
relentlessly. One tore into a Ropucha-class LST, moments before the
second impacted an Alligator-class LST, igniting fires and causing
flooding in both vessels.

The Russian Admiral was enraged. The troops and equipment on these
transports were vital to the Soviet plan to close the Atlantic for the
vital early days of the war. “Get that bastard!” he bellowed into his
radio transmitter to the commander of his ASW screen.

Several miles away, another Metel anti-submarine rocket (known to NATO
as the SS-N-14 Silex) leapt from the torpedo tube of the formation’s
Udaloy destroyer. The rocket lofted out of the water and sped to the
terminus of the four enemy missiles, the dropped its torpedo into the
water once it reached the predetermined point.

Back aboard Trafalgar, de Bicardi once again heard, “torpedo in the
water! It’s right above us sir!”

“All stop!” the captain ordered, some stress finally creeping into his
voice. Trafalgar’s pump jet propulsion ceased, and the sub glided
through the water, a shadow in the deep. “Sonar, a report if you
please.”

“It’s passing in front of us sir, port to starboard, above the layer.
Now it’s passing down our starboard side. It sounds like it’s doing
circles around us, searching. Hasn’t got us, sir.”

The UGMT-1 Orlan torpedo continued to circle around the point in the sea
where Trafalgar now lay motionless. After several minutes it ran out of
fuel and sank to the bottom. But just as the British crew was beginning
to heave a sigh of relief, a second torpedo splashed into the water
almost in the same spot where the first had circled. De Bicardi waited
while this one too completed its fruitless search, then ordered five
knots on a northeasterly course. Two more torpedoes splashed into the
water astern of the British sub. This time their active seekers found
Trafalgar, and both fish bored in. One was lured away by a noisemaker
decoy but the other motored through the bubbles and continued to close
the distance. At the last minute de Bicardi, whose boat was now working
up to flank speed, ordered a radical turn to port. The Orlan torpedo
closed...and swam through the knuckle of water created by Trafalgar’s
wake without exploding. The sonar room’s cockney-accented chief looked
out into the bridge and thought he actually saw some sweat trickle down
his captain’s high forehead.

Two more SS-N-14s fell into the water well to the rear of Trafalgar, but
these were too distant to have any hope of detecting the British sub.

“Well,” de Bicardi said to no one in particular in his clipped accent,
“that was somewhat exciting.”

Back aboard Krondstadt, Stolich was fuming. Two of his precious
transports were in flames and he hadn’t even been able to exact revenge
on the offending enemy submarine. He had expended valuable ordnance in
an attempt to flush out the enemy, but in the end had come up dry. He
couldn’t devote any time to effectively hunt the submarine. His
remaining transports needed to get to their destination on time, and he
didn’t want to give the NATO sub yet another shot. One of his Kashins
had taken the surviving crew off of the the Ropuchka, but the commander
of the Alligator (Tepir in Russian) LST was reporting that his fires and
flooding were under control and that he might be able to restore engine
power in a few hours. Stolich ordered him to continue, but warned him
that he couldn’t devote any escorts to protect him. The Russian
amphibious group continued west, now short two of its transports.

A few hours later Trafalgar came to periscope depth. De Bicardi noted
the obviously sinking Ropuchka and then saw the Alligator which appeared
to be making very slow progress westwards. A Tigerfish torpedo was
dispatched and one more thundering explosion lit up the Arctic night.
Trafalgar headed south, back into X-Ray station.

**Seventh Post:**

While Trafalgar’s battle with the amphibious convoy and its escorts went
on far to the northeast, at the western end of X-Ray station USS Boise’s
night was just starting to get interesting. Commander Morgan had kept
his boat on an east-southeasterly course and above the thermal layer
after breaking contact with the Kiev group hours earlier. Up until now
they had heard nothing since turning back towards their patrol area.
That began to change as Boise-s sonar room, taking advantage of the deep
water under the sub’s keel, began to pick up surging surface contacts
approximately 30 nautical miles in front of them in the first
convergence zone, heading directly for them at 30 kts, then lost them
again as they passed out of the CZ. Before they lost contact Boise’s
sonarmen were able to distinguish two different DDGs, one Kirov, and on
carrier. Unknown to Morgan, the USS Connecticut to the southeast had
monitored the passage of this carrier group out of the White Sea several
hours earlier, but owing to the confined spaces in those waters had been
unable as yet to make a contact report and was consequently unaware that
a war was on, though the captain had his suspicions.

“We’ll maintain course and speed until we pick them back up again at
closer range,” Morgan told his bridge watch, “then we’ll go deep and
quiet and try to get inside the formation to see if we can get a shot at
that flattop. Their sonar performance will be seriously degraded at that
speed”

The American submarine and the Soviet carrier group continued to close
over the next thirty minutes until Morgan hear, “conn, sonar, I’m
picking them back up. Same composition, same bearing. The carrier is
going to pass just to our port side if we maintain course.”

“Helm, make your depth 800 feet, then all stop,” Morgan ordered.

“Aye, sir.”

USS Boise descended through the thermal layer and into the deep as the
Russian ships thundered on towards her. An Udaloy II-class destroyer,
the lead ship of the formation, passed to Boise’s port side. The
Kuznetsov and the Kirov-class battlecruiser (Boise’s sonarmenr had now
distinguished this ship as the RKR Kalinin) would also pass to the
American submarine’s port side, though much closer. Morgan’s plan was to
launch three fish at the carrier and one at the battlecruiser, then
rapidly reload and launch one more torpedo at the Kalinin before going
deep and clearing datum.

The big Soviet ships thundered past, with the Kuznetsov only 4000 yards
distant. Morgan was turning his boat to port to match bearings and
launch his torpedoes when he heard, “conn, sonar, there’s another
destroyer bringing up the rear sir. It sounds like another Udaloy. If he
maintains current course he’s going to pass within one mile of us.”

“Damn,” Morgan swore, “that completely screws our egress plan. This
isn’t a suicide mission. Let’s adjust.”

Judging that the oncoming destroyer would not be able to detect his boat
while travelling at 30 kts, Morgan decided to allow the DDG to pass and
then use the two torpedoes he had intended for the Kalinin to dispatch
the nearer threat. But he would have that carrier, nothing was going to
divert him from that now.

The minutes ticked by and the throbbing of the oncoming Udaloy’s screws
grew louder and then began to pass to starboard.

“Conn, Udaloy two’s range is under 1000 yards,” reported the sonar room.

“It’s time,” said Morgan. “Helm, bring us to bearing three-three-five.”

USS Boise slowly turned, bringing her nose to bear on the receding
sterns of the Russian ships.

“Tracking party, are our solutions on the carrier and the Udaloy still
good?” asked Morgan.

“Roger sir,” the weapons officer reported.

“Very well. Match generated bearings and shoot!”

Aboard the Soviet carrier Kuznetsov, flagship of the Red Banner Northern
fleet, Counter Admiral Starka was just standing up from his chair on his
flag bridge, preparing to turn in and get some sleep. It was after 2am
local time, the second day of the war, and so far things had been going
according to plan. His fleet was fully at sea, trying to run the
gauntlet of NATO submarines that he knew had to be here so as to break
out into the North Atlantic. So far, other than some losses to the
amphibious landing group up north, his fleet’s transit had been
unopposed. Then, just as he turned to walk the few meters to his flag
cabin, his eyes shot to a luminous flash on the horizon.

The first MK48 Mod 5 ADCAP torpedo had run straight and true to a point
right under the stern of the Udaloy-class destroyer Admiral Zakharov
before detonating, creating a luminescent column of water that lifted
the destroyer’s already wrecked propellers completely out of the water.
The Admiral Zakharov was doomed before her stern settled back into the
water, and the second MK48 that bored in and broke her back only ensured
that fewer survivors would jump from her decks into the frigid arctic
sea.

“What happened?” demanded Starka, “why was there no warning of an
attack?” Just then his receiver started buzzing. It was his flag captain
one deck above. The report made his blood run cold.

“Sir, Kalinin reports multiple torpedoes heading our way from the
southeast, range approximately six thousand yards.”

Kuznetsov was already at flank speed, and Starke felt the deck begin to
tilt slightly as the ship’s captain altered course to put the torpedoes
on his stern. Minutes sped by as the amazingly fast American torpedoes,
the sonar on his carrier reported they were moving at 55 kts, closed
with his precious ship. To starboard he watched the Kalinin, a dark
shadow in the night with a luminescent tail from its churning
propellers, turn to bring its Metel ASW missiles to bear on the threat
vector. Two blindingly bright streaks erupted from the battlecruiser’s
boxy launchers as the Russian counterattack lofted into the cold night.

Aboard USS Boise Commander Morgan heard, “Torpedo in the water! Make
that two, two torpedoes in the water, directly astern, range under one
thousand yards!”

“All ahead flank!” ordered Morgan as the Russian UMGT-1 Orlan torpedoes
began their search pattern. “Take us deep!”

“Conn, sonar, it sounds like one of the torps has us, the other is still
searching.”

“Sir,” the weapons officer reported, “we’ll lose the wires on the fish
if we evade.”

“No choice,” answered Morgan.

USS Boise dove, turned, and raced southwest at its best speed of 32 kts
away from the torpedo chasing at a speed of 45 kts. “This is going to be
close,” Morgan muttered.

The Russian torpedo inexorably ate up the distance. The torpedo room
called of the range, 800 meters, 700 meters, five hundred meters, 300,
then, “conn, the torp’s screws have stopped. I think it ran out of gas
sir.”

Morgan let out a ragged breath. “Very well, slow to five knots, bring us
around back on a northerly heading. Let’s see if we can make sense of
what our weapons are doing.”

The Boise’s MK48s, with much farther to travel then the rocket-delivered
Russian weapons, were just now closing with the fleeing Soviet carrier.
Kuznetsov’s captain could do nothing but trail decoys. In this situation
he was better off maintaining a steady course in hopes of outrunning the
American (he assumed they were American) or at least giving his towed
decoys the best chance of luring them away. The Soviet ships had
detected three incoming weapons, and he knew his chances of avoiding all
of them were slim.

As it played out, the decoys failed completely. The first Mk48 sped past
it and detonated under Kuznetsov’s starboard-most propeller, wrecking
both the shaft and the screw. The explosion also lifted the carriers
stern and pushed it left. The resulting turmoil in the water threw off
the seekers for the following two fish, both of which exploded in
generally the same part of the big carrier’s starboard quarter, tearing
a long gash in the hull and flooding several compartments. Kuznetsov
began to list to starboard.

“On the flag bridge, the carriers captain reported to Starka by phone,
“Tovarich Admiral, we can make eleven knots, no more. Flooding is under
control, and we have no fires.”

Starka, whose strategy had un-raveled in the span of only a few minutes,
asked, “what of the enemy submarine?”

“We launched a counterattack into the area where we believe the
torpedoes came from, but heard no explosion. The enemy is still out
there comrade.”

“Very well, take us north at whatever speed you can make. Call in the
aviation to hunt the enemy submarine. Those lollygaggers were supposed
to have cleared this channel before we ever arrived!” Starka fumed.

USS Boise ascended back above the layer and once again made contact with
the Russian ships.

“Conn, sonar, the enemy flattop is hurt but she’s not dead, sir. And
that Kirov is riding close escort now.”

“They’re still in range, just barely,” reported the weapons officer.

“Let’s see if we can finish them off. Get a solution, two fish for the
carrier, two for the Kalinin.”

Minutes later four more torpedoes ejected from Boise’s tubes and started
running for the big Soviet ships.

It took several minutes for the Soviets to detect the spread of American
torpedoes, but when they did, Admiral Starka knew his flagship was in
serious trouble. To starboard, Kalinin when to full power and surged
ahead of the stricken carrier, but Kuznetsov’s damaged screws could only
produce eleven knots, and the whole ship was vibrating with the effort.

In the end, the carriers death was surprisingly graceful. The two Mk48s
bored in, one impacting under the stern and destroying the remaining
propulsion that Kuznetsov possessed, and the other impacted her port
quarter, temporarily correcting the original list, but causing
unconstrained flooding at the stern. Kuznetsov began to settle as her
crew gathered on the rear of the flight deck to step into the icy sea
and waiting life rafts. Among them was Admiral Starka, his career now in
tatters, waiting for a launch to take him to Kalinin, which had outraced
its own tormenting torpedoes.

After creeping south away from the scene of action for two hours,
Commander Morgan on USS Boise came up to communication depth and
transmitted a burst message to CINCLANT:

“Scratch one flattop.”

**Eighth Post:**

While the Kuznetsov was sliding beneath the waves of the Arctic Ocean,
USS New York City at the southwest corner of the X-Ray station patrol
area was creeping south at five knots after having dispatched the Victor
III several hours previous. The thrill of that engagement had worn off,
but not the euphoria felt by Commander Beam at having dispatched one of
the enemy’s more capable subs so early in the war. NYC’s sonar operators
had heard nothing since then, however, and Beam had taken his crew off
of action stations. Currently the American sub was staying above the
layer, trolling its towed array below like a deep sea fishing trawler
looking for its steel prey.

As the last hours of the first day of the war slipped by, however, New
York City’s sonar night watch began to pick up a distant rumble in the
first convergence zone, 35 miles to the east southeast. Beam, who
couldn’t bring himself to turn in for some sleep even though he knew he
should take every opportunity available to him at this point, walked
into the sonar room to watch over his sailors’ shoulders as they slowly
distinguished between sever contacts.

His lead sonar technician, eager to get his captain to stop breathing
down his neck, decided to feed him some preliminary information to maybe
encourage him to head back to the bridge.

“Sir, this looks big. I’m making out what looks like a Kirov, so either
Kirov herself or Kalinin up here, and Kuznetsov. They sound like they’re
escorted by two DDGs, but I can’t make out the type as yet. If they keep
their current course and speed we should intercept their formation in
about an hour. They sound to be making about 30kts.”

A thrill coursed through Beam’s veins. Getting a Russian sub was one
thing, but now he had an almost textbook shot at what looked like the
flagship of the whole Russian fleet.

“All right, we’ll maintain course and speed. We’ll lose them when they
pass out of the convergence zone, but as soon as we reacquire and get a
good range, speed, and bearing check we’ll dip below the layer and move
in for a shot at the big boys,” Beam ordered.

Another thirty minutes passed as the Russian ships duly disappeared from
the American sonar scopes and then reappeared right on cue about 10
miles from Beam’s boat. This time however, the lead sonarman ad some
interesting news.

“Conn, sonar, I’ve pegged the Kirov-class as the Kirov herself, but the
sound on the carrier is off from what we have on file for Kuznetsov,
sir.”

“What do you mean?” Beam asked, walking back into the sonar room.

“Well, sir,” the sonar tech said, turning in his chair to look at his
captain, “what I mean is that she sounds newer, quieter, improved, like
she has new screws or something. Kuznetsov just got back from a
deployment, didn’t she? They couldn’t have refitted her that fast, not
with four brand new screws, certainly?”

“No…,” Beam said thoughtfully, “no they couldn’t have, unless…”

“I see what you’re thinking sir. She’s got to be the Varyag! I didn’t
think she was in commission yet.”

“Neither did I,” the captain responded, “but intel has been telling us
that the Russians have been ramping up their naval building, big time.
You can bet if they were planning to start a war that they would want to
start it with two fleet carriers instead of one. We need to get this
sent up.”

USS New York City came up to communication depth and sent off a burst
transmission with their contact report that seriously altered CINCLANT’s
calculations for the balance of naval power in the North Atlantic.

Aboard the TAKR Varyag, Admiral Shustov, the commander of the Red Banner
Northern Fleet’s Aviation Group 2, was seriously concerned. Several
hours earlier an ASW helicopter had reported explosions just to the
north of his projected course, indicating almost certainly that there
was one of those bloody quiet NATO submarines operating there, but since
then the aviation /assets hadn’t been able to get even a sniff despite a
prodigious expenditure of sonobuoys. Shustov desperately wanted to slow
his group down so as to bring the formidable hull and towed array sonars
on Varyag, Kirov, and his two escorting Udaloy-class destroyers to bear
against the submerged threat. As it was, his high speed made his ships
essentially blind below the water. His consternation was amplified by
the paper message he now held in his hands that told of the disaster
that had befallen Aviation Group 1. Kuznetsov sunk?! In the first twelve
hours of the war?! He knew this news meant that the success or failure
of Soviet strategy in the North Atlantic rested with his sole surviving
large carrier. Despite the loss of Varyag’s sister ship, his own
command, combined with the rest of the Northern Fleet /assets, was a
force to be reckoned with.

Shustov’s orders were inflexible, however. The fleet had to get to the
open ocean at best speed to execute STAVKA’s grand strategy. But, to the
Admiral’s thinking, STAVKA’s strategy was served in no way by losing its
most powerful /assets in the opening moves of the war. His own course,
closest to the Kola and Norwegian coast, was itself a compromise between
STAVKA’s obsession with getting the fleet into open water and Shustov’s
hope that the more southerly track would avoid the bulk of the lurking
NATO submarines.

As Shustov fretted over his orders, Commander Beam and USS New York City
quietly descended below the thermal layer as they closed on an intercept
course with the Soviet formation’s starboard flank. Beam felt confident
in his ability to get inside the Russian screen undetected, given how
fast they were steaming, but there was safety in the Russian’s speed as
well. If he had to evade or alter course for any reason he would quickly
fall behind the Russians. Catching up would mean generating noise, which
he couldn’t do here and now.

As it happened, not evasive action was necessary, and USS New York City
closed on the starboard quarter of the two speeding Russian capital
ships undetected. Kirov was furthest north, between NYC and the Varyag.

Beam briefed his plan: “at six thousand yards we’ll launch two fish each
at Kirov and Varyag, then I want the torpedo room to turn and burn to
get a fifth torpedo into the tubes and launched at the carrier before we
go deep and clear datum.”

Beam’s heart rate rose steadily as his boat drew closer to the
predetermined point at which he would loose his weapons, and because of
the continuous flow of coffee he was drinking that occasioned frequent
trips to the head.

As New York City neared the attack point, Beam ordered, “open outer
doors on tubes one through four. Flood tubes one through four. On my
mark…”

Four Mk48s ejected from USS New York City’s torpedo tubes, trailing
their wires behind them. The sailors in the torpedo room worked
franticly to load a fifth weapon into the number one tube. Soon this
torpedo too was speeding towards the Varyag at 55 kts.

Aboard Varyag, Shustov heard the dreaded report. “Tovarich Admiral, the
screen commander reports multiple torpedoes incoming from the
northeast!”

“Tell him to flood that area with torpedoes!” Shustov ordered curtly. He
wasn’t about to let this skulking submarine, undetected or not, have a
clean shot at his ships.

Soon Metel ASW rockets were erupting from the box launchers on the
trailing Udaloy, lighting up the inky Arctic horizon.

New York City’s chief sonarman gave the bridge a play-by-play of their
onrushing torpedoes and the responses of the Soviet ships. “They’ve
turned away from the fish sir, range now 4000 yards to Kirov, 3500,
3000. Four thousand yards to Varyag. The torps have Kirov, sir. They’ve
gone active. Closing, now 1000 yards, 800…”

The two torpedoes closed inexorably on the fleeing Russian battlecrusier
with a 20 kt speed advantage. Three more were heading towards the more
distant but slightly slower Varyag.

“Four hundred yards, two hundred, one hundred…”

The rumble of an explosion was audible through the American sub’s hull.

Admiral Shustov watched in horror as the water directly amidships of the
dark shadow that was Kirov to his ships rear flashed and turned to foam,
lifting the World War I-battleship-sized cruiser out of the water.
Shustov didn’t know it then, but the torpedo’s warhead had detonated
directly under Kirov’s keel, breaking the ship’s back. As the stricken
ship settled back into the roiling water, the second Mk48 impacted
directly on its starboard side. The explosion tore a massive hole along
the side of the ship, flooding numerous starboard compartments on
several decks. Kirov rapidly began to take on a list to starboard that
started slowly but then accelerated as more and more seawater rushed in.
The battlecruiser’s superstructure crashed sideways into the sea, and
then Kirov was belly up, sinking below the waves with nearly her entire
crew of 700 sailors and officers.

Back aboard New York City, the double explosion prompted cheers from the
crew that were quickly silenced by the frantic call from the sonar room
of “torpedoes in the water! They’re right on top of us sir!”

“Crash dive!” ordered Commander Beam, “all ahead flank!”

Despite Beam’s caffeine-fueled rapid response to the new threat,
geometry was against him and his boat. The first two Orlan torpedoes had
separated from their rockets and splashed into the sea directly behind
him in such a way that their circular search patter required only a
quarter turn before the seekers on both weapons found and locked on to
the American sub, only a quarter mile distant. Both torpedoes followed
the submarine as it dove, its screw desperately pounding the water in an
attempt to claw the boats speed up from 5 kts to 32. The effort was for
naught. Both torpedoes plowed through the noisemakers that Beam ordered
to be ejected to try to create a screen, and his boat was moving too
slow to make any radical evasive maneuvers. The first Russian torpedo
impacted New York City’s screw, wrecking it and flooding the engine
room. As the American sub’s engine noises ceased the boat began to
descend stern-first. The second Orlan bored in and completed the
destruction, impacting on the submarine’s back just below the sail,
opening up the bridge to the sea and mercifully killing Commander Beam
and his entire bridge crew. The broken hull of USS New York City and its
now dead crew descended toward the ocean floor, joining Kirov and its
crew.

Aboard Varyag, Admiral Shustov was in shock at the loss of Kirov. One
minute it was there, and seemingly the next it was gone. Then his
receiver buzzed. It was his screen commander.

“We got him, Tovarich Admiral. We recorded two explosions from the
vicinity of our ASW rockets, and then breakup noises.”

“Very well,” Shustov returned the receiver. Good news, but it wouldn’t
help him or his carrier, who were still being chased by three American
torpedoes. He was going to need some luck to survive this night. He said
a prayer to the God that the State told him he wasn’t allowed to believe
in.

Lady Luck, or God, smiled on Shustov’s prayer. Varyag was trailing a
torpedo decoy that succeeded in seducing the lead American weapon. The
Mk48 exploded violently several hundred yards behind the carriers
churning screws. This explosion caused the second torpedo to lose its
target in the resulting acoustic chaos and also explode prematurely.
That left one torpedo churning towards Varyag. As it closed, the
carrier’s captain ordered a radical turn to port, not that his decoy was
expended, in a last desperate attempt to create a knuckle of water to
lure away the ship’s tormentor. This last evasion failed, and Admiral
Shustov actually watched the luminescent wake of the American torpedo as
it closed with Varyag’s port side, dozens of meters below him. Just
before it impacted, one of his staff officers grabbed him and threw him
to the deck, cutting his face.

The explosion shook Varyag’s entire 60,000 ton bulk. Alarms screamed and
Shustov thought he could detect a slight list. Then the engines slowed,
and his receiver buzzed. It was the ship’s captain.

“Tovarich Admiral, the damage is not too severe. We have some minor
flooding along the port side. I’ve slowed the ship to give the damage
control parties some help in shoring up the hull, but I expect to be
able to make full speed despite the damage. Flight operations should be
able to continue as soon as we resume our course.”

Shustov let out a ragged breath and thanked the God he hadn’t believed
in until five minutes before. Red Banner Northern Fleet had had a very
bad night to this point, but one of its fleet carriers and one of its
battlecruisers were still afloat, and Russian strategy was still
tenuously intact. Added to that was the destruction of a NATO submarine.
But it had been a close-run thing, and he cursed STAVKA for not allowing
him to conduct his task group as he knew how. The price for their
meddling had been the lives of Kirov’s 700 crew.

**Ninth Post:**

To the southwest of the battles that were ending around the Soviet
carrier groups, USS Connecticut was in a bind. In his attempt to
maneuver closer to the ships passing to his east, Connecticut's captain
had unwittingly put his state-of-the-art open-water attack submarine
into the middle of a Soviet carrier group centered around the Kiev-class
carrier Baku. This would have been ideal, except for the fact that he
had barely 600 feet of water under his keel, even shallower water on all
sides, and didn’t know for sure yet whether the world was at war or not.
These restricted waters prevented him from using his boat’s greatest
strength, the ability to go deep and cruise silently at relatively high
speeds to maneuver into positions of advantage.

“Sir,” the lead sonarman told his captain, who was watching over his
shoulder at that moment in the sonar room, “the formation looks like the
helicopter carrier here, two Kashin-class destroyers, one of them sounds
like a Mod, here and here. These two are doing lead and trail for the
carrier. Then further to the west” (Connecticut was currently east of
the main bulk of the formation) “is what sounds like a Kresta II
cruiser. There was that frigate that passed us earlier sweeping ahead of
the formation. We lost him a few minutes ago. And just know we picked up
another frigate bringing up the rear. They're all moving at 8 knots, and
their chances of picking us up under these conditions are better than
makes me comfortable.”

“Me too,” said the captain, “and you can bet the air above us is
swarming with Bears and Helixes."

Aboard TAKR Baku, less than four miles from Connecticut, the Russian
task group’s ASW Commander, Senior Captain Rodnik, heard one of his
staff officers call, “Tovarich captain! Baku’s towed array is making
intermittent contact with a submerged target on a bearing of
zero-four-zero. It is very faint, but there is definitely something
there comrade.”

Rodnik had received with horror the news of the loss first of Kuznetsov,
then of Kirov. He was determined that the same fate would not befall his
charge.

“Order the Admiral Levchenko to put a rocket torpedo onto that bearing,
two miles from our location,” Rodnik commanded brusquely.

“That is a little close tp us,” the staff officer protested mildly,
before a withering look from the captain turned him back to his
communication terminal to send the order. A few seconds later a Metel
anti-submarine torpedo roared out of the launcher of the Admiral
Levchenko, an Udaloy-class destroyer a dozen miles to the northeast, and
settled onto a course towards Baku. Two miles distant the torpedo
separated from the rocket and dropped into the sea.

“Torpedo in the water! Torpedo in the water bearing three-one zero!”
called the lead sonarman, a little too excitedly. “Range looks to be
about two miles sir,” he said, more calmly this time.

“This isn’t normal at all,” muttered the captain, "maintain course and
speed for now." Then and there he knew they were at war, but he couldn’t
bring himself to shoot and potentially be the one to start World War III
without confirmation. The torpedo, though uncomfortably close, was too
distant to actually pick him up, but it did tell him that he had been
detected but not localized. The noise of the fish should actually give
him a few minutes to to communicate, evade, or attack. But first he
needed more information.

“Release the comms buoys,” he ordered, “report what we’ve heard so far
and see if there are any orders from Norfolk.”

Back at CINCLANT Headquarters in Norfolk, the report from Connecticut
provided the last piece of the puzzle regarding the whereabouts of the
major units of the Red Banner Northern Fleet.

“Sir,” the J2 briefed Admiral Adams, CINCLANTFLT, “that accounts for
every one. We have both Kuznetzovs, both Kirovs, both Kievs, and both of
the Slavas, not to mention the amphibs that Trafalgar picked up and all
the escorting older cruisers and tin cans. The Varyag being ready for
sea was quite a shock, but it appears Boise was able to put Kuznetsov
herself out of action. On the losses ledger we picked up New York City’s
distress beacon a few minutes ago.”

“Damn,” muttered Admiral Adams. Losing not just men, but also whole
ships, was a new experience for him. He didn’t like it, but he felt
proud of what his young captains had accomplished so far. He hoped the
rest could stay alive. He would need every boat he had, what with the
whole Soviet navy surging into the north Atlantic and all of his own
carriers out of position. The Russians couldn't have piked a worse time
to start a war. But what did we expect? he asked himself, that they
would give us a courtesy call to let us know that the war would start on
Thursday?. Waiting until the Atlantic fleet carriers were out of
position and attacking in the dead of winter was looking like a
brilliant stroke on the Russians' part.

After sending their burst transmission and receiving the by this point
expected war warning in return, USS Connecticut went deep. Her captain
knew he only had a short time before the enemy torpedo circling to his
west ran out of fuel. When that happened, he would be vulnerable to
detection again.

“Weps,” he said to the weapons officer, “it’s time we show these Russki
bastards what this boat can do.” He left un-said that he had come to the
conclusion that the only way out of the predicament that he had
maneuvered his ship into was to fight his way out. This was going to be
tight.

**Tenth Post:**

“Weps, do we have solutions on all the targets?” asked the captain of
USS Connecticut.

“Roger sir. The shots will be a little long, but we’ve got good
solutions on all enemy ships. I’d recommend concentrating on the center
of the Russian formation.”

“That’s what we’ll do. I want to fish targeted at each of the Kashins,
and four at the carrier. If we’re going to do this, let’s make it
count.”

This was where USS Connecticut would show one of the decisive advantages
of the Seawolf-class submarines over the older and smaller Los
Angeles-class boats. Connecticut’s eight torpedo (as opposed to a 688’s
four) tubes, housed in a two-deck torpedo room, allowed her to launch a
devastating opening salvo. Her captain intended to make good use of this
advantage.

“Match generated bearings and shoot!”

The bid attack submarine shuddered eight times as one after another each
of her torpedo tubes was emptied their deadly contents into the sea.

“All fish are running normal sir,” reported the weapons officer.

“Conn, take us as deep as we can go,” ordered the captain. “Make you
course one-five-zero, speed 28 kts.”

“Course one five zero, speed 28 aye,” responded the petty officer.

Connecticut’s captain would try to use the confusion of his attack and
the ability of his submarine to cruise silently at relatively high
speeds to escape from the center of the Soviet formation. At this range,
he knew at least some of his torpedoes were bound to miss, but if he
could put some distance between himself and the Russian ships then they
stood a good chance of survival, which he viewed as his primary mission
at this point.

Aboard Baku, Senior Captain Rodnik cringed as he heard the report he had
been dreading.

“Tovarich captain, there are torpedoes, many torpedoes headed this way!”
called his staff officer. “There is much noise between our own torpedo
and these new ones, but there could be as many as ten! I cannot give you
a clear bearing, but their range appears to be approximately 7
kilometers.”

Ten?! How was that possible? Rodnik considered. Could there be two enemy
submarines out there? How would they be working together? He thought
NATO submarines usually operated alone. Whatever the situation, it
appeared that his attempt to drive the enemy away has spooked him into
launching a large though long-range attack.

“All ships evasive action away from the incoming torpedoes. Order all
ships to go active with their sonar, and order the Admiral Levchenko to
launch another anti-submarine rocket,” ordered Rodnik.

“All the Russian ships just went to full power sir, sounds like they’re
turning their screws to us and...they all just started pinging sir.
Multiple medium and low frequency sonars just lit up from the bearings
of all the targets we’ve been tracking...wait...there’s another one sir,
a low-frequency sonar pinging far to our north. It sounds like the one
they put on their DDGs, but I can’t be sure at this range sir.

Luck had smiled on USS Connecticut. She hadn’t heard the Udaloy-class
submarine Admiral Levchenko that had been protecting the northern flank
of the Baku’s formation, but neither was the potent Russian ASW
destroyer near enough to detect the American sub. In fact, Connecticut’s
attack location put her beyond the reach of any of the Russian sonars
now pinging away. The captain felt rather pleased with himself until...

“Con, sonar, torpedo in the water! One just dropped in right behind us,
just about where we launched our fish from.”

“All ahead flank!”

Connecticut accelerated downward through the thermal layer, building up
to her maximum speed of 35 kts.

“I don’t think it has us, sir,” the sonar room reported. “Fish is
circling, looks like about 2000 yards behind us.

“Slow to 5 kts, give me a report on our own fish,” ordered the captain.

“We lost the wires when we dove, sir, but they all appear to be running
straight and normal.”

Senior Captain Rodnik was desperately trying to maneuver the ships of
the task force whose ASW defenses were his responsibility out of harm’s
way. His two nearest escorting destroyers were already at flank speed,
but the big Baku was only slowly building up to her maximum of 30 kts.
His sonars hadn’t picked up any enemy submarines, but they had localized
the tracks of eight torpedoes heading for the heart of his formation.
Then, the captain of the nearest Kashin-class destroyer did something
incredibly brave. In an attempt to save the carrier, he turned his ship
across the wake of the bigger ship to try to decoy the torpedoes away.
The ploy didn’t quite work as Rodnik had hoped, though the destroyer
captain’s bravery was oddly rewarded. The four fish heading for Baku
continued to home in on the carriers thrashing propellers, but the two
targeted on the destroyer lost their prey and plowed past both ships in
search of another target.

Baku was not as fortunate. The four MK48s closing on her continued to
draw closer. The first was lured away by the carrier’s towed decoy, and
a huge explosion aft marked the effectiveness of that piece of
equipment. The detonation of the first torpedo caused the second to
malfunction, but the two remaining bored in and struck the helicopter
carrier on her starboard side. Two huge geysers on water drenched the
ship’s superstructure as the explosions shook the ship like a piece of
paper.

As Baku passed out of the mist and falling water, Rodnik’s first
impression was that the damage was not fatal. The ship’s engines were
still moving her at maximum speed, and his staff reported that the
ship’s sonars were still intact. He would let Baku’s captain handle the
damage to the ship. His job was to exact revenge on the NATO submarines
that were tormenting him.

“Tell the aviation commander that I want every helicopter aloft, every
maritime aircraft searching the area between us and Admiral Levchenko,”
he ordered.

“Captain,” the staff officer reported, just after the attack one of our
buoys may have picked up reactor noises, somewhere west of where those
torpedoes came from.

“What are you waiting for?!” Rodnik yelled. “Tell Admiral Levchenko to
put another rocket on top of it, now!”

**Eleventh Post:**

The Captain of USS Connecticut, Commander Ahab Romeo by name, was
beginning to breathe easier after the chaos his torpedoes had apparently
caused in the Soviet ship formation. His sonar technicians were tracking
the Russian ships fleeing away from his torpedoes like spokes away from
the hub of a wheel. Then came the rumble of explosions as the Mk48s
exploded against the Baku. As the torpedoes were occupying the attention
of the Russian sonarmen, Romeo had taken Connecticut deep and increased
speed, increasing speed to 30 kts so as to clear the datum of his
attack. Romeo was just about to order his boat to slow when the sonar
room reported, “sir, a torpedo just started pinging to our north...range
seems to be about two miles.”

“They must have caught a sniff of us when we picked up speed,” muttered
the captain. “OK, here’s what we’re going to do...”

Commander Romeo explained on for a few minutes, then set his crew to
work. Forward in the double-decked torpedo room the weapons handlers had
managed to reload four of eight torpedoes. These they now readied for
launch.

As the Russian Metel torpedo continued to search two miles the north,
Connecticut turned from her southeast course to a westerly one, back
towards the Baku.

“Flood tubes one, two, four and five,” ordered Romeo.

“Tubes flooded sir.”

“Launch tubes one and two at target one, then cut the wires and execute
part two.”

Two Mk48s ejected from Connecticut’s torpedo tubes and sped on a
pre-determined course towards the stricken Russian helicopter carrier.
Immediately the American submarine turned hard to starboard until it was
moving away from the weapons it had just launched.

“Fire tubes four and five,” ordered the captain.

Two more Mk48s sped northeastward towards the distant Udaloy which could
still be heard pinging with its distinctive low-frequency active sonar.
Connecticut once again turned sharply to starboard, accelerated to a
quiet 20 kts, and descended on a southeastward course.

“Let’s hope they don’t expect us to evade towards the coast,” Romeo
muttered.

Aboard Baku, Senior Captain Rodnik’s fist struck the arm of his command
chair at the inability of his primary anti-submarine weapon, the Metel
rocket, to find its mark. Baku had taken damage, and he just watch one
of his escorting ships, the Kashin-class destroyer Stroyniy, take two
torpedo hits to his north and begin to sink. Baku could still launch
aircraft and fight, but his task force had been hurt and so far he had
failed in his task as the group’s ASW commander. Just then he received
reason for his blood pressure to shoot even higher.

“Captain!” called the staff officer, “the Admiral Levchenko reports
multiple torpedoes in the water, they report they are under attack and
evading to the north!”

Another officer reported, “sir, Baku’s towed array reports they hear two
torpedoes bearing on us!”

Rodnik gritted his teeth. There had to be two NATO submarines out there
in a area of ten square kilometers. How on earth could he be missing
both of them? He had eight helicopters and maritime patrol aircraft
dropping listening devices and searching for the magnetic signature of
the enemy submarines within an absurdly small area. In fact, his
aircraft were in great danger of colliding with each other. Why was this
so hard!?

“Order the Levchenko to counter-attack!” Rodnik shrieked. “Again!”

“Sir,” the staff officer reported lamely, “Levchenko reports that they
are heading north and cannot turn to bring their rocket launchers to
bear until they’ve evaded the torpedoes heading towards them!”

Rodnik looked at the man, mouth agape. How could this be happening?

As USS Connecticut sped silently southeast towards the Russian coast her
sonar operators noted with satisfaction two explosions on the bearing
where Baku should have been, though none on the bearing of the Udaloy.
Romeo hadn’t expected anything from those two fish other than to
distract the capable ASW vessel enough to allow him to escape. Not that
his sonar room was picking up a forest of active buoys pinging far in
his wake, Connecticut’s commander could breathe a little easier. He had
managed to get his boat into a pickle, but this time he’s been able to
fight his way out...this time.

Senior Captain Rodnick had collapsed into a catatonic state shortly
after the two torpedoes impacted the flagship of his task force. Baku
was a wreck. She was afloat, but the one of the escorts was coming
alongside to pass over a line. She would not be returning to port under
her own power. One more capital ship on the Red Banner Northern Fleet
was out of the fight.

Twelfth Post:

Commander Daniels and USS Baltimore had passed a quiet first night of
the war since detecting the westward moving Soviet SAG in the hours
after receiving their war warning. Baltimore had continued on their
southeast course across the center of X-Ray station without encountering
even a frigate or patrol corvette. That changed in the early hours of 14
February, the first full day of World War III.

“Conn, sonar, we’ve got a faint submerged contact off our port bow. I
can barely make it out, but I’d say it’s at least ten miles away.”

Daniels spoke quietly. “Helm, slow to just enough so that we have
steerageway. Let’s assess who this is.”

Aboard the Soviet Sierra I-class submarine Kostrama, Captain Dovgan was
receiving a similar report from his sonar room. “Tovarich Captain, I
detected a very faint contact just now to our port bow. It was there for
just a minute, and then it disappeared.”

“Can you be sure? What is the range?”

“I could not get a range my captain, it was too faint, and then it
vanished.”

Dovgan thought for a moment, then decided, “we will continue our current
course. I doubt he would have heard us if we only heard him so faintly.”
Dovgas was less sure of this last statement than he tried to sound. “We
are very quiet. I we maintain our current slow and quiet speed we will
be able to use our towed array as we slip past him to detect him...if
there is anything there.”

“Yes captain,” the sonar officer responded.

Kostrama continued on a northwesterly course at five knots, her captain
growing increasingly uneasy.

Back aboard USS Baltimore the situation began to become more clear over
the next hour.

“Conn, sonar.”

“Sonar, aye,” responded Commander Daniels.

“Sir, we’ve got a firm track on this guy. He’s cruising at five knots on
a reciprocal heading to us, just above the layer. He’s a quiet SOB. I
can’t get a firm fix on type or even nationality right now. He’s going
to pass us to port at a range of about 6 miles.”

“Trafalgar is supposed to be north of us,” Daniels responded, “but she
should be in her own PZ. Any sub in our sector should be hostile. Still,
I’d like to get a better fix on him before we take the shot, just to be
sure. We’ll wait until he passes us, then turn and get into has baffles
to close the distance.”

And that is precisely how it happened. Over the next two hours USS
Baltimore slipped around behind the unidentified submarine and picked up
speed to 8 kts until she was following at a range of under two thousand
yards.

“Conn, sonar, I still can’t give you a solid fix on who this guy is. He
sounds Russian to me, and if I had to guess I would say he’s one of
their newer boats, maybe an Akula. He’s just too quiet for me to be sure
sir.”

“Very well, we’ll continue to follow. :et me know if he makes any course
changes.”

“Aye sir.”

Aboard Kostrama, Captain Dovgan couldn’t shake the feeling of being
watched. He submarine had continued silently, trailing his new towed
array, but his operators hadn’t heard a thing since their initial
contact nearly three hours previous. His orders were to break out into
the north Atlantic to support the fleet’s operations there, not to hunt
submarines here in his country’s home waters. In light of that, he
planned to continue on as steadily and silently as he could so as to
avoid any engagement that could compromise his primary mission. He had
confidence in the ability of his Project 945 Barracuda class boat.
Still, he couldn’t shake his uneasiness. The sonar room was beginning to
think that they hadn’t heard anything at all, but Dovgan didn’t agree.
The Americans were out there...

By now Baltimore had been following Kostrama for over six hours.
Commander Daniels was satisfied enough by the target’s course and speed
that he was not in fact following any NATO boat. He didn’t have a
classification, but anybody behaving this way in this part of the world
had to be Russian. Daniels made his decision.

“Weps, I want to Mk48s on this guy, with two more ready to go if need
be.”

“Aye sir,” the weapons officer responded, the turned and gave the proper
orders to his torpedomen.

“Tubes two and four ready sir,” he reported a few seconds later.

“Very well, match generated bearings and shoot!”

It took Kostrama’s sonar operators several seconds to detect the
torpedoes closing from directly astern. By then it was almost too late.
Almost.

“Go to full power!” ordered Captain Dovgan. “Eject two decoys, one on
either side, on my mark.” He waited as his sonar room called back the
relentlessly decreasing range to the torpedoes even as his own submarine
worked up to its full speed of 35 kts. “Now!” he ordered as the pings of
the Mk48s began to become audible through the hull.

Two noisemakers ejected from Kostrama, spinning and crating clouds of
bubbles to confuse the Mk48s. Dovgan had gambled by maintaining a
straight course, but he had a theory about the effectiveness of his
countermeasures. He thought they might prove to be more effective if he
presented as small a target to the enemy seekers as possible. His gamble
paid off. Both Mk48s plowed through the noisemakers bubble clouds and
passed by the Russian submarine, one to either side. Suddenly, their
seekers had no more targets and they continued on into the empty ocean.

Onboard Baltimore, Commander Daniels had been first gratified as his
sonar room identified the surging submarine as a Sierra-I class boat,
then frustrated as his weapons closed without the expected explosions at
the end of their run.

“Conn, sonar, our torps missed. They are now more distant than the
target. He must have managed to lure them away somehow, sir.”

Daniels clenched his fist. “Fire tubes one and three, he ordered.”

Dovgan was just about to order his boat to slow and turn to fire a
torpedo back down the bearing from which the enemy weapons had come when
his sonar room reported two more torpedoes inbound. His successful
evasion gave him hope. If he could repeat this performance then he would
have gained enough range on his tormentor that they might be unable to
take another shot without increasing their own speed and thus making
them audible to him. If they did that, he could fight back. If they
didn’t, well, he could continue at flank speed away from the enemy
hunter. His boat was faster than anything the Americans, except those
new Seawolfs...

“Maintain course and speed,” he ordered, but take us below the
thermocline layer. We will evade these just as we evaded the last too.”

Kostrama repeated her previous maneuver, with the same results. Both
enemy torpedoes passed her to port this time. Dovgan was gaining
confidence.

Commander Daniels was flabbergasted. How had this SOB managed to evade
four Mk48s?! These were supposed to be the most sophisticated torpedoes
in the world! Now the enemy submarine, evading at flank speed, was
nearly beyond the effective range of his weapons. He had one more shot
and then his chance was gone.

“Weps, this time maneuver the fish so they come in at an angle,” Daniels
ordered.

“Aye sir.”

“Fire tubes two and four.”

Captain Dovgan was really beginning to believe he would survive this
engagement despite the fact that he now had a third attack inbound to
his baffles. His boat was making 35 kts in the deep, and he had easily
evaded four of the best weapons the Americans had. He felt confident he
would do the same to these last ones and then he was sure he would be
out of danger. The he would go shallow and radio for the Maritime
Aviation units who were supposed to be sanitizing the sea around him to
come and hunt down his tormentor.

Everything unfolded as before until, “Captain, the torpedoes are
diverging behind us! They are going to bring them in at an angle this
time.”

Dovgan’s blood froze. How had he not anticipated this? He hadn’t
calculated how his tactic would work from an oblique angle, and the
geometry of the enemy attack meant that at least one weapon would attack
him from the side if he turned to put the other directly behind him. In
the end, he decided his best chance was to continue straight.

It was the wrong decision. Both Mk48s bored in, this time ignoring the
siren calls of the noisemakers. The explosions crumpled Kostrama’s hull
like a tin can, sending her to the bottom and cutting short the lives of
Captain Dovgan and his sixty crew.

Commander Daniels was gratified to finally hear the death of what should
have been an easy prey under the circumstances. He had been forced to
expend a large proportion of his weapons, and he coulnd’t be sure that
he wouldn’t need those torps in the coming days. But it was a victory.
He turned his thoughts towards the east as Baltimore came about and
cleared datum.

**Thirteenth Post:**

Histories of the Battle of X-Ray Station would generally record the
first day of WWIII as a smashing victory for the NATO forces in the
Barents Sea. The Red Banner Northern Fleet had lost its flagship, the
carrier Kuznetsov, as well as one of its powerful battlecruisers, two
destroyers, two amphibious transports, and two attack submarines, in
addition to the helicopter carrier Baku being put out of action for the
duration of the conflict, and the carrier Varyag receiving minor damage.
However, the Soviets still possessed a powerful force heading into the
north Atlantic to prosecute the war with a creative strategy that would
present the allies with daunting challenges.

On the other side of the ledger, the allies had lost the Los
Angeles-class submarine USS New York City while attacking the Varyag
battle group. Worse was to come. In the late morning hours of 14
February Soviet naval aviation was able to detect, localize, prosecute,
and sink the most successful American submarine to date, the USS Boise,
killer of the Kuznetsov. The loss was tempered because much of the
Boise’s crew, including her captain, Commander Morgan, survived the
ordeal. After receiving a mortal hit from an air-dropped Soviet torpedo,
the stricken submarine performed an emergency blow, surfacing the boat
and allowing the surviving crew to abandon ship. They were subsequently
rescued by Soviet patrol frigates and spent the remainder of the war as
POWs.

The remainder of the Red Banner Northern Fleet, wounded but still
powerful, re-consolidated and reorganized, and proceeded into the north
Atlantic via the Norwegian Sea...
