**Northern Fury \#41 – Tour de Force**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Feb 2020</u>**

***Note: This scenario is quite large, and many changes were made based
on Andrew’s fantastic reports which are shown below.***

---

*"...at least five Oscar II SSGNs remain."*

Oh heck... Five Oscars, dozens of other subs, and I've got isolated
supply ships, blind as can be, spread all over the ocean. This is not
going to end well. Even if I avoid the Oscars I just know I'm going to
run over some geriatric Whisky and lose a task group.

All joking aside, this looks really challenging.

---

Well, my usual slow rate of play hasn't improved - here's Day 1!

**THE SITUATION**

It's carrier wrangling time in cold northern waters, as I'm assigned to
herd 10 assorted carrier groups into their patrol zones, see that
they're fed, watered, fueled, and generally resupplied, all while
maintaining a continuous presence on-station. Oh yes, by the way, you
can't send the munitions ships to the carriers, they have to come south
to you. There are streams of munitions ships and reinforcements coming
up both Atlantic coasts, from as far south as the Mediterranean, a
variety of minor task groups in the vicinity of Iceland, and some subs
(mostly good SSNs) going to and fro.

The Russians are digging in hard in Norway, and while they're not a
major force on the high seas at the moment, they still have the
potential to be nasty opponents. Intel warns of multiple submarines
about, with the possibility of many coming out of reserve, a Kirov group
lurking in home waters, the potential for land-based bomber attacks
(still), and, of course, the usual porcupine of SAM and fighter defences
over land.

I'm to keep pressure on these forces, despite my dwindling stockpiles of
fuel and munitions, and execute any specific tasks in an 'economic'
fashion. Many of my munitions are in short supply, particularly TLAMs,
and it will be many days before more arrive in-theatre. I do have the
option of calling in B-52s to launch CALCMs, but that takes political
capital I'd prefer not to spend. I can't, however, ignore the need for
tankers, and I pester my superiors until they grant me two sets of
tankers, 5 in Iceland, and 5 in the UK.

**THE PLAN**

My plans in the north are simple. Stay in your zones, patrol quietly,
and wait for reinforcements to arrive. The Enterprise and Roosevelt, in
the north-eastern corner of the theatre, are in the worst supply
condition, so they are ordered to patrol side-by side, on either side of
their common zone boundary, in order to provide mutual support if
attacked. The other carrier groups will patrol individually, creeping
quietly along and listening for subs.

I'm more worried about submarines than any other part of the Russian
forces, particularly their SSGs and SSGNs. Those can reach out from a
convergence zone and cripple and kill weakly defended munitions ships,
even if the subs can't quite make the intercept for a torpedo attack.
I'm also mindful that relying on my SAM defences might be problematic,
since it takes a trip to Norfolk or Rota to resupply them. So, up north
my defence will focus on my fighters, and the carrier CAP, which I
normally keep far afield in the expected threat direction, is kept tight
over the carriers to be instantly ready for pop-up missile attacks from
any direction.

The Atlantic traffic will be guided into two narrow streams, one up each
coast, and these paths will be patrolled by P-3s and Nimrods. I don't
have enough ASW ships to escort all the freighters individually, so the
airplane patrols will have to do. The one isolated freighter full of
TLAMs out in mid-ocean is assigned its own dedicated P-3 patrol to give
it a full-time escort. I do not want to lose that one.

I'm also sending most of my E-3s to guard the ocean routes, rather than
up with the carriers. (Those should have enough E-2s to do the job on
their own.) With the E-3s acting as missile lookouts, the isolated
munitions ships and small task groups can travel with radars off,
significantly reducing the ability of enemy subs to stick up a mast and
detect us with ESM. Hopefully, the E-3s will also give us a chance to
spot the launch location and launch a counter-attack if any missiles get
fired.

I do have some lone munitions ships near Keflavik, and these are ordered
to stay put! I do not want them wandering around alone, where they can
blunder into some old SS and die. They are not to go anywhere until
escorts arrive (probably TG Algonquin) in a few days.

**DAY 1**

**The Svalbard Question**

Looking around, I find I'm uncomfortable with the northern Russian radar
screen deployed on Svalbard and the islands in the Norwegian sea, and
the possibility of Russian aircraft operating out of or through Svalbard
is an unnecessary risk. I would like freedom of movement for my
vulnerable recce, surveillance, and tanker aircraft in that area, so I
can screen for incoming bombers and Bears, and the last thing I need is
a MiG-25 or something popping up with an afterburner dash and picking
off my slow soft targets.

Therefore, 'Operation Northern Freedom' begins! My last few TLAMs in the
region are launched immediately to eliminate the isolated radar stations
(ignoring the space surveillance radars in the Globus array, which won't
affect me), and then my aircraft start to patrol the vicinity of the
island. It turns out that the Russians currently have some older MiG-23s
and ASW planes patrolling near Svalbard, and there are several FFLs and
patrol boats in the region. Mid-day fighter sweeps from the Roosevelt
manage to take care of most of the MiGs, and the French Etendard pilots
are quite happy to sink the largely defenceless light craft with
Exocets.

In the meantime, preparations are put underway for the three northern
carriers to try and shut the Svalbard runways late in the day.

**Probing & Orders**

With the Svalbard radars down, I start sending some planes around the
north coast of Norway, probing to see what's there. ESM shows some
tempting looking surveillance planes in the Russian rear, and long-range
F-14 operations manage to get some of the ones operating over the ocean,
but that provokes a strong reaction. MiG-31s scramble out of Banak, and
while my pair of F-14s can kill the first two, they have to flee from
another four, flying so low the enemy's missile's can't lock on. The
MIGs pursue at high altitude, and I'm forced to stay low, burning fuel
far too quickly, until more F-14s arrive to rescue my fleeing fighters.
When my pilots get to the tanker they only have two minutes of fuel
left. More probes are launched later in the day, proceeding more
cautiously with tanker and ESM support, and a few more ELINT Badgers and
MiG-31s are shot down.

Fresh orders arrive mid-day, directing me to set up a pair of ASW
stations on Greenland and Jan Mayan Land. The relevant task groups are
already headed in that direction, so no major changes are required yet.
One of my cruisers, the Worden, is being recalled to the States. This is
a bit of a loss, but fortunately the cruiser has just refuelled, so it
should make the long trip in good time, heading between Greenland and
Iceland, and following the 'Western Passage' route, passing my
northbound traffic. The biggest new item in the orders is a request for
an alpha-strike on Bodo. Resources are limited, but I should be able to
muster enough for a good strike after dark.

**Oscar**!

The Russians don't sit idly by an take my harassment on the chin. The
first issue is the discovery of a fast-moving SSN near the Enterprise
group, well within the first CZ. An S-3 hurries over to check it out,
and it turns out to be an Alfa. This is grim news, because if it dives
deep, none of my air-launched torpedoes can reach it. The US Navy
immediately starts hollering for the Royal Air Force to send over a
Nimrod to rescue them with its deep diving torpedoes, but it's so far
away it will take at least half an hour to get there. Fortunately, the
Alfa is shallow at the moment, so the S-3 swings in and drops a pair of
torpedoes in its path. The Alfa immediately starts dashing for the deep,
and the torpedoes follow down into the darkness, There, just before they
exceed their depth limit, they manage to hit with meters to spare, and
the water pressure does the rest.

The Alfa didn't get a shot off, but that doesn't mean it hadn't done
damage. The Alfa had friends, and it had told them where we were. A few
minutes later my E-2s start screaming about a cloud of high velocity
sea-skimming missiles clearing the horizon from the north-east. Oscar!
Fighters from the Enterprise and Roosevelt start dashing to intercept,
when the E-2s call again. More missiles, these ones to the north-west!
As my planes continue to scramble and intercept the first pack of
missiles, it becomes evident that there are only two missiles coming in
from the north-west, which is peculiar. Maybe some sort of hasty upgrade
of an ancient Echo, Juliett, or Whiskey Long-bin?? There's not much time
to consider it further, and my fighters continue to intercept and
destroy the incoming missiles. They get them all, at the cost of a
significant proportion of my air-to-air missiles, and none of them get
close enough to the carrier for me to engage them with SAMs.

Once the fighters have scrambled, S-3s are launched to hunt for the
Oscar in the NE, but nothing is found where the missiles were first
spotted, so they continue further out along that bearing. While they're
doing this, two more missiles appear from the NW, and are shot down, and
then two more, and so on. It looks like it really is an Oscar out there,
and, for whatever reason, he's firing only two missiles at a time. This
is actually very helpful for tracking him down, and F-14s fly along the
extended chain of missiles, and eventually spot the launch point.
Slow-moving Alizes from the Clemenceau finally arrive on the scene, and
quickly manage to localize and sink the massive sub. Meanwhile, the S-3s
in the NE have flown all the way out to the limits of the Oscar's
missile range and found nothing. They're on their way back to the
carrier, pursued by some MiG-23s from Svalbard, when the Oscar blunders
under one of their passive sonobuoys half-way along their search path.
The S-3s just have time to drop torps on the Oscar as they pass by, with
F-14s blasting overhead to engage the pursuing MiGs and pry them off the
S-3s' tail. It's a very close call, but it works out in the end.

The final tally is two Oscars and one Alfa sunk, which is very good
news, and no SAMs expended. But most AAMs are in extremely short supply
now, particularly on the Enterprise, so much so that I'm putting some of
my fighters on Ferry missions, just to allow others to get a full
loadout.

**Late-Day Engagements**

As the day progresses, more probes are made along the west coast of
Norway. An attempt to run a TARPS bird through Andoya is quickly driven
away by a combination of MiG-23s and SA-11s. Another probe down towards
Bodo reveals an SA-10 and SA-11 in the region, and Su-27 and MiG-23s in
defense. A few of those get shot down, which should help when dealing
with Bodo later tonight.

Just before dusk, attack planes from the Ark Royal, Clemenceau, and
Roosevelt make a strike on the radar-less Svalbard airbase. The plan is
for Harriers and Etendards to pop over the hills immediately south of
the airbase, and take airbase defences by surprise, while A-6s stand
guard with ready HARMs, and others wait for the all-safe to come in with
LGBs. My thought was that the small peripheral airbase might have some
older medium range SAMs, like SA-6s and SA-8s, or maybe an SA-11.
Unfortunately, when the Harriers crest the rise, they find themselves
staring at a pair of SA-10s, a pair of SA-11s, and a collection of
SHORADS and AAA. Ooops... My pilots push to full power and dash in,
releasing cluster bombs moments before the SAMs arrive. Three of the
Harriers are cut down before they can escape, but they do manage to
wreck the heavy SAMs, and with the help of the French Etendards and
incoming HARMs they pummel the remaining defences, allowing the A-6s to
wreck the vital airstrip facilities. There should be no more fighter
interference from this direction, at least for the next few days.

Not all the action is in the air, as another Russian sub is found
operating in the Greenland-Iceland gap. P-3s from the local airbase
quickly refine their sonobuoy contact (it turns out to be a Victor) and
sink it.

**Alpha-Strike Bodo**

Once night has fallen the attack on Bodo begins. It's an
all-attack-plane event, without my normal TLAM support, and I've decided
not to ask for B-52 CALCM help either.

The opening shots come from SLAM-carrying A-6s, which attempt to sneak
their missiles up valleys to deal with the two surveillance radars east
of Bodo, and over the hills to find the SA-10 and SA-11 located south of
Bodo. None of it goes really well. Some get shot down by hidden SAMs
(apparently there's an army in those valleys out there - who knew?) ,
while others get picked off by SHORADS before they can spot their
targets.

They do manage to get enemy radars to turn on, however, and that's when
my HARM carriers get their chance, salvoing missiles at the SAM sites,
and getting good hits on the major elements near Bodo. Unfortunately,
they also find there's an SA-20 lurking further east in the hinterlands,
and I can't get at it, so Russia still has control of the high-altitude
band. Low-level Maverick and cluster-bomb attacks by F-18s are next,
dashing down the coast and over the hill from the north, while A-6s come
in from the south, pummeling the remains of the SAMs and airfield soft
targets with Snakeyes. Normally my TLAMs would have soaked up many of
the last SHORADS, but that doesn't happen here, and the return fire is
deadly. Three of my F-18s are shot down near the airfield, and several
more have chunks blown off by AAA, before the bomb hits suppress the air
defences. That allows the other A-6s to come in as low as they can with
LGBs, cratering runways and taxiways, and putting the base out of
operation. As the A-6s turn away, my last few HARMs manage to snipe
those two surveillance radars which were supposed to die at the
beginning.

Now that the attack is retiring to the carriers, the fighter escort
swings north, skirmishing with some Su-27s, and then trying to make a
low-level sneak attack on the coastal ASW planes operating near Tromso.
That provokes a very strong local response from the three airfields
there, which scramble MiG-23s, MiG-25s, and Su-27s to intercept me. My
pilots manage to kill some of the MiG-23s but have to withdraw without
getting the flying boat. The Su-27s, with their long-ranged missiles,
are definitely a problem, and I'm starting to wonder if I'll need to
relax my Phoenix ROEs to get at them effectively.

More to follow...

Here's another day of activity.

**DAY 2**

Things are calm at the start of Day 2. Southern replenishment ships and
task groups continue to head north, and two of my northern subs are
underway south, headed for refit and resupply in Faslane. The Raleigh
and Jeanne d'Arc groups continue heading towards the landing sites for
the new ASW helipads, and the Nimitz group is completing resupply. The
Roosevelt and Enterprise are in bad shape for munitions, particularly
AAMs of all types, but they do have enough to keep a respectable defence
in hand.

After some consideration, I decide to move my two northwestern carriers
(the Clemenceau and Ark Royal) to the southern end of their patrol zone.
They no longer need to attack Svalbard, and the move will put them
closer to the resupply ships when the time comes. I'm also getting
worried about pop-up cruise-missile attacks on the upcoming ASW
heliports. If I keep the little carriers far north then a sub may creep
south of me, and I won't be able to intercept the missiles. This move
will bring my fighters closer to the targets they need to protect.
(Although it does lose me some ground against bomber threats. So far
there's been no activity of that kind, fortunately. I had expected a
Bear or two sniffing around by this point.)

**Fighter Sweep - Andoya**

I've been tasked to recce Bodo again tonight (no problem), and Andoya in
the afternoon. That's more problematic, since the last time I flew near
Andoya there was a determined response from the Russians. I really doubt
a TARPs bird would survive the trip. So, I decide to run an early
afternoon fighter sweep against the three airbases in the Andoya /
Bardufoss / Tromso area, and try and sneak in my recce bird while the
fighters are distracted. The Roosevelt and Enterprise are almost black
on air-to-air missiles, so the Nimitz sends its entire complement of
F-14s and some F-18s, while the Roosevelt and Enterprise provide the
jammers. The fighting goes much better than yesterday, and while my
fighters are mixing it up with Su-27s and MiG-23s and MiG-25s, the TARPS
bird comes in low, led by a pair of F-18s with the Roosevelt's last 4
HARMs. The HARMs kill the Andoya surveillance radar, and manage to wound
an SA-11 that pops up, but there are at least two more short-ranged SAMs
down there, plus AAA, and the MiGs keep surging out of Andoya.
Meanwhile, my fighters are running out of Sparrows, and they have to
start looking for ways to disengage. The odds of success are dwindling.
Sadly (but probably prudently) the TARPS pilot waves off and aborts the
recce only 15 miles away from his target.

So, while the recce itself was a failure, I did manage to get some good
information on the Andoya defences (which include an SA-20 on the
mainland near Bardufoss, preventing me from doing high level
overflights), and claim a good bag of enemy fighters, including three of
the very dangerous Su-27s. This will be very useful, since as my fighter
sweep was launching HQ sent word that we are to alpha-strike Andoya.
That will come tonight.

**Skirmishing at Sea**

Russian submarine activity is evident throughout the day. First a Nimrod
finds a Kilo a few miles behind the Fort Victoria group, which means I
had a very close miss here. I have very few diesel-carrying oilers, so
the loss of this one would have been significant. Next, TG Algonquin,
patrolling the western ocean route finds a Victor right in front of a
cargo ship full of TLAMs. Finally, the Vinson, heading NE to relieve the
Enterprise, spots a Tango near Jan Mayan land, where the Baby Ice ASW
heliport is due to be set up. All three subs are sunk, but it's a very
clear indication that the Russians are still quite dangerous beneath the
sea.

I also make efforts to provoke Russian responses up north of Norway, by
flying F-14s around in the area, but little comes of the effort. It's
not until I get quite close to the shore to shoot down another ELINT
Badger that the Russian's finally launch another two MiG-31s out of
Banak. But it's only two, and not the aggressive response I provoked
yesterday. This is an interesting development. The Russian Mainstays are
patrolling over northern Norway, and are conceivably within range of a
Phoenix shot without getting too far inland. If the Russians are already
running out of fighters there... Hmmmm...

**Northern Phoenix**

The opportunity is too tempting to miss, so Operation Northern Phoenix
begins. Half a dozen heavily laden F-14s take off from the northern
carriers, hauling precious Phoenix missiles, and EA-6s, ES-3s,
Sparrow-armed F-14s, and tankers go with them. The package arrives off
the northern coast of Norway in the late-afternoon sun, and, after a
pause for refueling the fighters turn south, closing relentlessly on the
orbiting AEW planes. Phoenixes roar off the launch rails, flying deep
inland and plunging down on the slow and vulnerable targets. Three are
shot down in flames, plus a couple more support Badgers. The F-14s don't
get very far inland before an SA-10 opens fire in front of them, but the
Tomcats are able to dive low, beneath the radar horizon, and avoid the
incoming missiles. (Question: all three Mainstays were patrolling
simultaneously. Had you intended that, or only one at a time?) ***Note:
No, this is fixed***

My attack doesn't go unopposed, and MiG-31s come scrambling up out of
Banak, but the Phoenix range advantage pays off, and they are shot down
without loss. The F-14s continue shooting as more planes rise to meet
them, until somebody finally notices that the last couple of planes
aren't MiG-31s at all. They're older MiG-25s, and aren't on the
'approved Phoenix list'. (This embarrassing error is glossed over in the
post mission debrief. The admiral is a busy man. We're sure he wouldn't
want to be disturbed.) Fortunately, they're nowhere near as capable as
MiG-31s, so my pilots manage to tackle them with Sparrows.

One side note to this, is that some of my fighters, diving to low
altitude to avoid missiles, spot some sort of commercial (?) ship
underway near the coast. What's it doing there?

**Alpha-Strike Andoya**

Once darkness falls, my alpha-strike package makes its way to Andoya.
Andoya is a smaller base than Bodo, isolated on its spit of land, and as
far as I can tell it doesn't have the same long-ranged SAM defences as
Bodo did, so the strike is smaller.

My leading fighter sweep encounters some resistance from Bardufoss
(MiG-23s and 25s), but nothing flies out of Andoya or Tromso, and the
few enemy fighters are quickly pushed aside. F-18s with HARMs and
Mavericks attack first, suppressing the medium-ranged SAM defences
(another SA-11 and some SA-15s and SA-8s), and then another set of F-18s
dashes in low, destroying the damaged SAM sites with cluster bombs, then
tearing over the airbase itself to savage some of the fighters parked in
open revetments. There have to be well over a dozen MiG-23s down there,
and it's fortunate they're not yet active, or I could have been in real
trouble.

Once the SAMs are knocked down the A-6s come in from safe altitude,
avoiding the AAA, and pummel the runways and other base infrastructure
with LGBs. There's still plenty of AAA down there afterwards, and
trapped aircraft too, but the base itself is not likely to be
operational for days.

**Supply**

Once the Andoya strike is launched and underway, the Roosevelt turns
south and starts heading for the replenishment ships. She should get
there tomorrow morning, all going well. Her place will be taken by the
fully restocked Nimitz. The Enterprise, further north, is actually in
worse supply condition than the Roosevelt, but I need her to hold on a
little longer. The Vinson is heading her way, and should arrive after
dawn tomorrow, at which point the Enterprise can head south too.

Many of my southern replenishment task groups are closing on their
destinations just south of PL Bravo, to ready for resupplying the
carriers, while others are still working their way up from the south.
One thing that has me wondering is the state of the T-A0s, which are
going to be accumulating south of PL Alpha. I don’t have a good plan for
them yet, and they may just steam back and forth in the ocean until
other tankers come back to top up from them.

**Upcoming plans**

As the day comes to an end, more orders come in from HQ. They want me to
look for a cargo ship called the Dralch, which may be the one I spotted
up north, and they also want recce runs in the Evenes and Andoya areas.
Andoya should be no problem, since I beat up the defences today, but
Evenes is still fresh, and presumably there are defences associated with
the nearby airbase. It may take some work to get in there, and I may
have to hit the base to do it. Also, now that the Mainstays seem to be
down, I'm looking at the main Russian search radars with hostile intent.
I'd love to knock those down, but I don't have precise enough locations
on them to simply hit them with TLAMs. They're still deep in the SAM
belt, so they may be out of reach for the moment. Planning staff are put
on it. We shall see!

**DAY 3 (MARCH 20 1994)**

As Day 3 begins, my two heliport construction groups are closing on
their destinations on Jan Mayan and Greenland, the retiring Roosevelt
has almost reached the replenishment ships south of PL Bravo, and the
Vinson is nearly on station to relieve the Enterprise. The northern
French and British carrier groups are down to about half fuel, but their
slow creeping ASW search patterns means their fuel consumption is low,
and they won't need to refuel for many days yet. My withdrawing SSNs
have passed their replacements, who are headed to a patrol zone just
south of PL Delta. The ships in the Atlantic are making good progress
northwards, although the scattered individual ships who don't have
escorts continue to be a concern.

**Coastal Shipping**

The question of that coastal merchant ship I spotted earlier continues
to nag at me, and HQ has expressed an interest in it as well, so an F-14
TARPS bird is sent for a look, accompanied by a few fighters and an ES-3
to do radar surveillance. The radar search finds the merchant quickly
enough, and it also finds a second lone ship operating further east.
Recce passes show one to be the trawler Dralch, which HQ was looking
for, and the other to be a container ship. I'm not sure what the Dralch
is doing, as it doesn't seem to be headed anywhere specific. Maybe
coastal minelaying? Both ships are under Warpac control, so they're fair
game to me. The Etendards on the Clemenceau are given the task, and they
fly in with a combination of buddy stores and Exocets to sink both of
the ships. (I'm finding Exocets to be really handy for light unopposed
anti-shipping work, when I don't want to expend a heavyweight
long-ranged Harpoon.) This does provoke another set of MiG-25s to fly up
out of Banak, but my escorting F-14s put them down without suffering any
losses.

The sinking of the two merchants is good. (Although, come to think of
it, HQ said to look for the Dralch, not sink it. I hope they don't
mind.) More important, however, is the discovery the ES-3 makes further
east along the coast. Radar shows an ominously large task group anchored
off Murmansk. While the radar operator is counting ships, the ELINT
sensors start picking up radar emissions from patrolling Foxbats
operating out of Rogachevo. There's no time to waste, and the plane
turns off its radar and hurries away into the darkness.

Presumably these contacts are the Kirov group alluded to in some of the
intelligence reports. In its current position, it would only take about
ten hours of steaming to get within missile range of my closest carrier
group. Fortunately it's not moving at the moment, but I may have to
consider a long-range ASM strike before it can get underway and become a
problem.

**Strike on Evenes**

With Bodo and Andoya out of commission, at least for the moment, the
most exposed of the enemy airbases is Evenes. HQ has asked for recce
runs in the area later in the day. I have already encountered some
long-ranged SAMs deployed north of Evenes, so a southern approach seems
wisest, but even so I'm not confident a lone recce plane can make it in
and out without loss. There's a good surveillance radar nearby, and
presumably fighters and more SAMs at the airfield itself. Therefore, I
decide to launch a small hasty dawn attack on Evenes, to soften up the
local defences and kill the surveillance radar.

The strike is composed of F-18s with LGBs, HARMs, and a few Mavericks,
and my intention is to go in above the SHORADS ceiling, hit the runways
and SAMs, and retire without going low. It turns out that Evenes is
guarded by two SA-11s (okay, suppressed by HARMs), a distant SA-4 to the
NNW (not a threat), and a distant SA-10 (too far away to engage me
effectively). But the unspotted SA-12 in the mountains to the NE is a
real problem, and it launches a huge salvo of missiles at my
laser-bombing F-18s, forcing them to go diving wildly towards the deck.
Fortunately the fjord walls are tall and steep, and the F-18s are more
nimble than A-6s, so they manage to escape below the missile barrage by
the narrowest of margins.

My attack doesn't actually kill any of the local SAMs outright, although
it wounds most of them, but it does manage to destroy the surveillance
radar, and cut the runway facilities at the base. After the bombing, the
F-18s go scurrying south through the hills, trying to stay well below
the threatening SA-12 radar, and some of them come across an enormous
vehicle park nestled in one of the valleys. Calls are made to the
carriers, and over the next hours more F-18s arrive with Snakeyes and
cluster bombs, and start wrecking the marshalling area.

**Fighter Activity**

Interestingly, there were no fighters launched from Evenes itself
against my strike, so maybe it was a divert airfield, with no fighter
presence? There are certainly fighters coming from Bardufoss, however,
where numerous old-model MiG-23s start making their presence known, and,
after no activity for about a day, I start seeing fighters coming out of
Tromso too. This prompts another mid-sized fighter sweep in the
Andoya/Bardufoss/Tromso area, which nets a lone Su-27, a few MiG-25s,
and a sizeable bag of the older Floggers.

Another sweep heads to the north coast again, with F-14s looking for any
more Badger recce planes which might be up. They don't find any (nor
have any more Mainstays appeared), so they come inland to attack one of
the Su-24s, which prompts two more hidden SA-10 batteries guarding Banak
to open fire. That makes three, surrounding Banak in a horseshoe. The
F-14s dive to safety, and then get tangled up with some aggressive
MiG-25s, but make it out intact in the end. In the meantime, one of my
S-3s takes a moment to check up on the Murmansk fleet. It's still there,
apparently resting at anchor, so for the moment all is well.

**Damned Tango!**

It's late-morning when the Russians hand me a serious setback. Urgent
radio calls start coming in from one of my T-AOs off the south coast of
Iceland, reporting a torpedo impact. The captain orders flank speed and
attempts to run, but the second torpedo hits half a minute later, and
water comes pouring in the two tattered wounds in the port side plating.
Within five minutes the ship has drifted to a halt, rolled over, and
sunk.

The ship was one of the lone T-AOs coming up the west Atlantic route,
without any escorts. Once she had reached the latitude of Iceland she
turned east, intending to anchor off Reykjavik with the other oilers and
resupply ships waiting there. She was only three hours from her
destination when she met her nemesis, a Tango which had quietly eluded
the P-3s patrolling the area. Now that there was a flaming datum the
P-3s hurried to the scene, and quickly found and sank the enemy sub, but
that was small consolation for the shipwrecked sailors, and no
replacement for the lost fuel.

With this wasteful and avoidable loss staring me in the face, I sit down
and do what I should have done in the beginning: make a proper plan. MPA
patrol zones are tightened up, coordinated, and adjusted, lone resupply
vessels are directed to form small convoys (even if it means delays),
and warship task group courses are adjusted to improve cover for the
oilers. In some cases the resources simply aren't there to protect
everything immediately, but I've at least got a better plan to get them
to places of safety, rather than simply crossing my fingers and hoping
for the best.

**Helicopter Bases**

By mid-day my two task groups have arrived at their helicopter bases at
Jan Mayan and Greenland, and while the main cargo and logistics ships
anchor to begin unloading, the escorting warships start patrolling the
immediate area for subs. The ASW helicopters transfer to the bases, and
begin deploying an east-west barrier patrol, although 'barrier' might be
a strong word. I've got it set up so each helicopter has a 50 mile wide
zone to hunt in, and since you only get about three miles each way from
a dipping sonar, there's clearly plenty of room for a sub to slip
through. Still, it's better than nothing.

It's going to take several days to fully set up the helicopter bases,
and my anchored ships (and the bases themselves) will be vulnerable
during that time. The Jan Mayan base gets an F-14 CAP, TG Whitney steams
to a location along the most likely cruise missile approach path, and
S-3s are set to patrol the general area all around the island. It seems
like reasonable defences are in place.

The Greenland base, however, has a peculiar problem. The edge of the
pack-ice is there, and although I have the Canadian O-boat SS patrolling
there, as well as the surface warships from the task group, none of them
can operate under the ice. So, there's a clear, unobstructed under-ice
route for an SSN to get into the area, without being detected in
advance. The more I look at it, the more it seems to be a big highway
with a "this way to defenceless victims" sign painted on it. The closest
sub I have is the SSN Groton, which was headed north to start patrolling
the gap left by the other subs which are returning to Faslane. It's
captain is ordered to turn the sub around and head SW at high speed, to
begin patrolling the ice-approach route as soon as possible.

The Greenland base is also so far from the carriers that it is difficult
to provide fighter cover for it. Planning staff are currently
considering whether to send the Enterprise group in that direction after
refuelling, or perhaps detach some of its fighters to provide CAP by
operating out of Iceland. Additional MPA cover should also be available
once TG Algonquin gets its valuable freighter of TLAMs to Reykjavik.

**Afternoon Activity**

The noon briefing brings word that HQ is requesting SEAD activity around
Bardufoss, which is the most heavily defended of the central Norwegian
bases. There's a pair of SA-10s near the coast guarding the most obvious
ingress routes, an SA-11 just N of Bardufoss itself, and an SA-12 and an
SA-20 further inland, along with several long-range surveillance radars.
And those are just the ones I'm aware of. Effective SEAD against this
array would be a major effort, and costly in terms of HARMS and PGMs
(which I want to preserve for an attack on the Kirov group). Planning
staff are set to work examining the options.

Meanwhile, the Roosevelt group has finally completed reloading, and is
heading north again, while the Enterprise group is headed south for its
turn at the tankers.

In the early afternoon, another recce-run is made on Evenes, overflying
the battered truck park, before more F-18s with Snakeyes come in from
the south to to complete the destruction. Another two flights of F-18s
are sent in to finish off the pair of damaged SA-11 batteries to the
east of Evenes. One of them gets fired on by an SA-15 guarding the
northern ingress route, but it's a long-ranged shot, and the missiles
fall short as the F-18s dash away across the fjord and into the
mountains again.

Late-afternoon sees a small fighter sweep go into the Andoya / Bardufoss
/ Tromso area again, but this time there is no fighter response of any
kind, only a few shots from the SA-10 near Tromso. This bodes well for
any upcoming SEAD activity in the area.

**Small Convoy**

The 1800 intel briefing comes in, with indications that the Soviets may
be positioning themselves to pull back from their most southern extent,
which is encouraging news. There is also mention of a small convoy
underway in the east somewhere, possibly headed for Rogachevo (which I
am unlikely to be able to interfere with) or even Svalbard (which would
be a suicide run - if I can spot it). An S-3 and some F-14s are sent out
for a coastal reconnaissance, and they find it slowly coming along the
coast, just passing Murmansk – four tightly spaced central targets and
three escorts. Alert the French!

It takes a few hours to arrange, but, with the help of the VC-10 tankers
out of Lossiemouth, the Clemenceau's complement of Etendards is sent
east, each of them carrying one Exocet missile. Periodic radar checks by
the S-3 show the convoy has continued slowly along the coast, at a mere
5 knots. The three escorts are on the front and flanks of the convoy, so
the Etendards swing in from the undefended rear side, launching their
missiles in succession through the gap in the coverage.

All four of the central cargo ships are struck and sunk (or I assume
they are cargo ships - I never got close enough for an accurate ID), as
is one of the Grisha escorts. The other two escorts (a Grisha and a
Krivak) mill around uncertainly, while the Etendards turn about and fly
back towards their tankers. There are MiG-25 radars coming from the
direction of Rogachevo again, and it is time to leave. As it turns to
fly home, the S-3 gets a last contact on the Murmansk task group, still
sitting stationary at the extreme edge of radar cover.

**Soviet Subs**

Early in the evening my ASW precautions start to pay off. After numerous
false contacts and biologicals in the Jan Mayan area, one of the escorts
in TG Whitney gets a direct-path hit on a submerged contact headed
south. The S-3s close in, identifying it as an SSK of some sort, before
sinking it with a well-placed Mk 50. I'm not sure whether it was headed
for the task group or the ships unloading at the new helicopter base,
but, in any case, I'm glad it's gone.

Several hours later another sub is spotted in the Greenland-Iceland gap,
cruising southwards at modest speed. It turns out to be an Akula, which
had the misfortune to travel directly under a passive sonobuoy. The P-3
on patrol claims this one, although it takes three torps to finally sink
it.

**Bardufoss SEAD and Strikes**

Much of the night is occupied by a series of strikes aimed at reducing
the air defenses in the Bardufoss area, and along the NW Norwegian
coast. Strike aircraft are called in from all four nearby American
carriers (even the stores-hungry Enterprise finds something to
contribute). The Clemenceau is busy hitting the convoy, but the distant
Ark Royal manages to send its last two attack Harriers, and tankers and
ELINT planes are brought in from Iceland and the UK to support the
effort.

The first phase concentrates on knocking down Soviet air surveillance
radars near the coast. A pair of TLAMs come flying down the fjord to
knock out the Big Bird radar ENE of Bardufoss, and a pair of F-18s come
in low with Snakeyes to wreck another radar further east. Unfortunately,
it seems that for every radar I kill, I find another one, so the overall
coverage isn't completely eliminated.

Another flight of F-18s comes in low from the north, planning to attack
the hilltop radar W of Tromso, and then carry on to bomb the SA-10 one
hilltop further south, but it turns out the area is much too heavily
defended to do all that. The pilots manage to kill the radar and an
SA-11 battery, but in the process they are fired on by two more SA-11s,
and three SHORADS. Their glimpse of the Tromso airbase shows at least 20
planes on the ground, plus whatever's under cover, and they radio the
update back to HQ as they duck down behind the hills again and head back
out to sea.

Fortunately, none of those aircraft seem to be flight-ready yet, and the
patrolling F-14s don't spot any interceptors, either from Tromso,
Bardufoss, or even the more distant Banak.

The main strikes reach the Bardufoss area shortly afterwards, flying in
from the west, just north of the battered Andoya airfield. The first
blow falls on the coastal SA-10 there, distracting it with HARMs, before
low-level F-18s finish it off with cluster bombs. As the HARM-carriers
(both F-18s and A-6s) loiter uncertainly over the coast, probing shots
with SLAMs and BOL HARMs start prompting more SAMs to reveal themselves;
a total of three SA-11s and some SHORADS around Bardufoss, a pair of new
SA-10s (actually SA-12s, it turns out) in the valleys south of the
airbase, and a probable third one somewhere near the coast to the north.
The SA-20 is still keeping quiet.

HARM barrages are fired towards the SA-11s, doing some damage, but the
SA-12s prove to be problematic targets. They need only brief moments of
terminal illumination, so the HARMs have great difficulty getting a good
signal to fire at. The real stars of the show turn out to be the
low-level F-18s, who go hurtling down the valleys using their night
vision, killing both SA-12s, finishing off an SA-11, destroying a newly
found SA-6, and pressing on to hunt the SA-20.

Some things don’t go well. The pair of Harriers come rushing down dark
waters of the Lyngen Fjord from the north, and drop a brace of retarded
bombs on the SA-12 near the base of the fjord, destroying most of the
battery. Turning about they vanish into the darkness, retiring back up
the fjord at wavetop level. The pilots are confident they’ve made their
escape, until one Harrier abruptly explodes, struck down without warning
by an optically-fired SA-6 they didn’t notice on the way in. I now have
only one operational attack Harrier, which is grim news for the
squadron.

In any case, the high altitude SAMs around Bardufoss are eventually
destroyed, allowing my Maverick-carrying F-18s to come in above the
SHORAD ceiling and eliminate the SA-15s and SA-8s guarding the base.
With those gone, F-18s with LGBs are called in to destroy the runways
and a few of the airfield facilities. Bardufoss is shut, trapping 6
planes that I can see, and whatever else is in its network of shelters
and caves.

I had also hoped that I might shut Tromso as well, and although I
damaged many of its surrounding medium and heavy SAMs, its SHORADS was
still completely intact. I suspect my odds of getting the enough LGBs
through the missile screen would be remote, so I reluctantly send the
remaining bombers home, taking their LGBs with them.

**Late Night Situation**

As the night draws to a close, the situation is looking better. Although
I have lost a T-AO, I seem to have crippled the Soviet air force for the
moment, and largely eliminated the major SAM threat in NW Norway. Bodo,
Evenes, Andoya, Bardufoss, and Svalbard are all shut by cratered
runways, and although there are more planes at Tromso and presumably at
Banak, none are flying at the moment. Soviet coastal shipping has been
struck a heavy blow, losing their small convoy and two independent
merchants, and the Murmansk task group seems to be holding still for
now.

My carrier situation is greatly improved, with the Roosevelt, Nimitz,
and Vinson all on station with good munitions loads. Enterprise is
essentially a spent force, but it will begin UNREP in a couple of hours,
and the completely fresh Kennedy should be arriving mid-day tomorrow.

HQ has sent some late-night orders for recce tasks tomorrow, and all of
them should be feasible. We will see what the day brings.

**DAY 4 (MARCH 21 1994)**

**Ship Movements throughout the day**

Replenishment activities are ongoing, as Day 4 begins, and more groups
arrive in theatre. The Kennedy group tops up its tanks from the T-AOs
south of Phase Line Alpha, and then advances to take up station in the
patrol zone between Iceland and the Faroes. This frees up the
Invincible, which tops up and heads west across the top of Iceland at
high speed, to start patrolling between Greenland and Iceland. The
Enterprise completes a pair of replenishments south of Phase Line Bravo,
and starts heading to a patrol station north of a line between my two
new helicopter bases, where it will provide air cover for both of them.
The Foch is still coming up through the North Atlantic, but by the end
of the day it has refuelled and is poised to enter the zone between the
Faroes and the Norwegian mainland. Both TLAM freighters make it to base,
at Reykjavik and Faslane, and I only have two other oilers still far out
at sea, one on each coast. One has a Spruance escort, so it should be
okay, and the other is relying on intermittent P-3 patrols as it comes
up the European coast. Hopefully that will be enough.

**Soviet Submarine Activity**

The Soviet subs are still hunting for us. One of the Vinson group's S-3s
finds and sinks a Victor III ENE of the carrier. The Vinson is in my
most north-easterly patrol zone, and this makes me wonder if I should
have ASW screening a lot closer to the coast of occupied Norway. My
Norwegian SS has been patrolling off the 'corner' of Norway, but so far
hasn't heard anything passing through, and I've not sent my ASW aircraft
in close to the coast for fear of SAMs and fighters. Maybe I should? The
P-3s are doing a good job in other places, however, and they find and
sink another Akula in the Greenland-Iceland gap.

The most alarming encounter comes early in the day, as my TLAM freighter
is headed into Reykjavik, and it finds another Soviet diesel sub lying
in wait. This time my freighter has an escort, however, and the three
ships of TG Algonquin are patrolling in the lead. The Kilo opens fire at
the Algonquin itself, which immediately counter-fires and turns to run,
while scrambling its ASW helicopters. The helicopters get to the sub and
sink it first, but the Algonquin is much too slow to outrun the
wake-homers at this range, and they bore in relentlessly. It's only the
Nixie which saves my ship, decoying the torps before they can impact.

The area outside Reykjavik had extensive P-3 patrols, but they had found
nothing, and the Kilo was literally only a couple hundred meters away
from a passive sonobuoy, yet remained undetected until it fired. This
leads to another change in policy. Up to this point I'd been restricting
myself to passive sonar, hoping to avoid alerting subs to my presence,
but no more. I revert to my normal practice, and the order goes out for
active sonar use on ships with powerful hull sonars. Let's blast away!
Even if that draws them in, at least I'll see them in advance.

(After their alarming experience, TG Algonquin docks alongside their
freighter, refuels hastily, then heads out again to escort a pair of
oiler and ammo ships around the west side of Iceland, and up to join the
other refuellers at PL Bravo.)

**Actions in the North - AM**

The Tromso airbase is the next target on the strike list. Last night's
heavy SEAD activity in the Bardufoss area destroyed or damaged most of
the heavy SAMs, so this attack doesn't need to be so elaborate. High
level attacks with Mavericks and HARMs clean out the four (not the three
I had expected) SHORADS in the immediate area, and then LGBs shut the
runway. Some aircraft are also detailed to hit the damaged remains of
the nearby SA-10, SA-11, and SA-4 that were struck by HARMs last night.
The attack aircraft can see numerous planes (mostly MiG-23s) parked in
revetments, and presumably the hardened shelters are full too. ESM picks
up Foxbat radars from Rogachevo during the strike, so some fighters are
sent to go skirmishing in that direction, and another SA-12 opens fire
on the passing planes from about 50 miles east of Tromso.

Recce activity up into the Barents confirms that the Murmansk group is
still holding position in the same location, and the radar operators on
the ES-3 are confident they also picked up a tiny moving contact which
had to be a surfaced or snorkelling sub headed into port. They also find
the two escorts left over from yesterday's convoy, still headed west. By
now the radar operators know the drill: For all your anti-shipping
needs, call the Clemenceau! More Etendards make the flight, and although
it takes a few more missiles (it's a daylight attack, so the ships can
see the missiles incoming and shoot back), the results are the same, and
the last of the convoy is sunk.

**Rogachevo**

I'm getting concerned about the Foxbats operating out of Rogachevo.
They're not exceptionally dangerous, two at a time, but they can
certainly interfere with things, and if they ever surge more (or have
something nastier they haven't shown yet), then they could be a
significant problem. Therefore, a modest sweep (six F-14s, tanker, and
ESM support) is sent to draw their teeth a little. And nothing happens.
No planes come up to fight. So, after hours on station, and multiple
trips to the tanker, the fighter pilots sadly turn for home with aching
butts and bursting piddle packs. Of course, that's when another pair of
Foxbats comes up. Those get shot down, but, overall, the results are not
great. Rogachevo is still very much a question-mark. It's a long way to
reach for a strike. Are TLAMs warranted? It's something to consider.

**ASW group**

Around noon radar operators report the sudden appearance of a group
Soviet ships in the Barents, off northern Norway. They can't explain
where it came from, or why they didn't spot it before, and keep mumbling
about "atmospherics" and "anomalous propagation". In any case, this
group's got its radars on, so it's quickly identified as an ASW group,
and it's headed west. It's not a threat at the moment (my submarines are
forbidden to operate there), but it does act like a radar picket, which
I would prefer to avoid.

"Call the Clemenc - er - no? Reloading, you say?" Unfortunately, the
Etendards on the Clemenceau are not available to hit the group, so the
call goes all the way south the Foch, which hasn't even crossed PL Alpha
yet. A pair of Etendards (the only ones currently loaded with Exocets)
head north with a VC-10 tanker in attendance and manage to sink one of
the Pauks.

**Central Cleanup**

Shortly after mid-day, a TARPs bird is sent to make a recce run of all
the enemy airbases west of Banak, reporting numerous aircraft on the
ground at Tromso, some at Bardufoss, and a few at Andoya. There's
nothing at Evenes, but a SA-8 gunner there reminds us that some of the
defences are still active. The TARPs bird also makes a gesture towards
Bodo, but there are a pair of active Ganefs and a big surveillance radar
still active in the region, so the pilot waves it off and heads back to
the carrier.

Meanwhile, the F-18s on the distant Enterprise have spent the morning
loading up with a pair of 500 lb LGBs each, and the entire force of them
launches and heads east. Confident that they are free to operate at high
altitude, without SAM or fighter interference, they begin a deliberate
hunt for parked aircraft and other targets, reminiscent of the 'tank
plinking' of ODS. All exposed aircraft are destroyed at Tromso,
Bardufoss, and Andoya, as well as the remaining SHORADS at Evenes. The
score of destroyed airframes is probably up over two dozen by the time
they are complete. I may need to make another follow-up to engage the
hardened shelters (particularly the big underground ones at Bodo and
Bardufoss), but that gets expensive in terms of large ordnance, and even
though I've resupplied the carriers, my number of penetrator warheads is
limited.

**Evening Briefing**

The evening intel briefing brings good news, in that the Russians seem
to be withdrawing from southern Norway. Apparently, their southern
Su-24s have pulled out, back to the Leningrad area, which would put them
some 900 miles from my closest carriers, and generally far from my
theatre of operations. (Unless they've actually gone elsewhere, of
course. Or have tankers.)

The not-so-good news is that they're sending 3 or 4 new battalions of
modern heavy SAMs into the Bardufoss region. I just cleaned out
Bardufoss! Hopefully they won't pop up just as I'm making operations in
that area. Even with resupply, my HARM stocks are not endless, and these
new forces may be tough to counter.

**Night Shipping Strike**

Once darkness has fallen, the remaining ten Etendards on the Foch finish
loading Exocets and take off to head north. Tanking en-route, they head
for the location of the ASW group, which is still heading west towards
my forces. Four of them peel off and make a run on the small ships,
sinking all of them, before turning back to their carrier. The remaining
six turn east, drop to low level, and fly towards a riskier appointment
near Murmansk.

Their job is to sting the big task group stationed there, and provoke it
to respond, so the loitering ES-3 lurking in the darkness can get a read
on what's out there. The Etendards swing in and approach from the north,
popping up just long enough for their radars to get a contact on the
enemy. Three missiles are launched at each of the closest two enemy
ships, BOL, with missile activation timed to happen only moments before
impact. Then the Etendards drop down to the waves again, and escape
westwards, while their missiles close with the enemy. Despite the
radar-off, sea-skimming approach, the Russians spot the missiles 4 to 5
miles out, and instantly light off every radar they have and start
shooting. None of my missiles reach their targets (no surprise), but the
rich ELINT haul is well worth it, and the delighted crew on the ES-3
heads back to the carrier to report.

The task group is powerful. Really powerful. I had expected a Kirov, of
course, probably a Slava, some older cruisers, and an assortment of the
remaining destroyers and frigates that made it back to base. You know,
the rag-tag remnants of their surface fleet. Instead, I've got five
assorted Udaloys and Sovremennys, two Slavas, not one, but two Kirovs
(when was the last time you saw that?), and, to my astonishment, the
Kusnetsov! I thought she had sunk weeks ago.

**The Plan**

As we speak, strike aircraft of all sorts are converging off NW Norway,
loaded with Harpoons, SLAMs, Exocets, and HARMs. They'll refuel as best
they can from the tankers, before moving on the Murmansk group. I had
intended to lead the attack with SLAMs, hoping their discrete no-radar
approach would let me take the outer ring of escorts by surprise, but
the Soviets' ability to spot the radar-off Exocets five miles out puts
this plan in some doubt. (I can't come in overland - there's at least
one SA-10 on the island there, and the concentration of airbases and the
port will certainly be well defended.) I don't expect to destroy many
(possibly none) of the high value targets, but I should be able to wreck
a number of the escorts, and consume a very large number of the enemy
SAMs. That way, when they do sortie, my subsequent attacks will be more
likely to succeed.

I can see that there's a pair of MiG-25s up from Rogachevo. I'm going to
leave them alone for the moment, rather than provoke a scramble, and
hope that I can get in discretely without being spotted. I've got
essentially all my tanker support tied up with my strike aircraft, so
there is little left to bring extra fighters along. The AMRAAMs on the
HARM-carrying F-18s will have to be my primary defence. I could be in
real trouble if the enemy spots the raid in advance, particularly if the
Kuznetzov gets her AEW helicopter up. Fortunately, there's been no sign
of her air-wing yet, and I really want to get this strike in before that
becomes active. The flight in will be tense...

Other upcoming operations include plans to finish off the air defences
near Bodo, and an attempt to knock out some of the major hardened
shelters at Bodo and Bardufoss.

We shall see...

**DAY 5 (MARCH 22 1994)**

**Murmansk Strike**

The day begins with swarms of strike aircraft converging in the midnight
skies NW of Norway. Some, from the more distant carriers like the
Enterprise, Clemenceau, and Kennedy, pause for refuelling, while the
others from the Nimitz, Vinson, and Roosevelt proceed without waiting.
The force heads east out into the open Barents, far from land, and then
(leaving tankers, ESM, and a fighter screen behind) curves south and
drops to low altitude, heading for Murmansk.

As the strike approaches its launch point the distant ES-3 turns on its
radar to illuminate the scene, only to find the ships have shuffled
around some. They're not emitting, at the moment, so I'm no longer
certain exactly who's who! There does seem to be a big contact in the
exact same place the carrier was, and another pair of big contacts
nearby, but the number of escorts seems to have diminished. Perhaps
they've gone into port? )(Actually, it looks like some were lost in
clutter in the island channel to the east of Murmansk, or had gone right
up against the shore.) Orders are issued, and the strikers lift up a bit
and launch a densely packed swarm of Harpoons and SLAMs at the enemy.
Roughly two thirds are fired towards the pair of big contacts (and the
one escort that happens to be in the flightpath), and one third towards
what may be the carrier, and then the missile carriers descend and turn
away north.

As the missiles calmly fly through the night, the Etendards follow
behind them, staying as low as they can, each carrying its single Exocet
closer to the target. Then the distant HARM carriers begin launching,
firing two barrages bearing only, without lock-ons, timing them to
(hopefully) arrive around the same time as the Harpoons. There's a
moment more of calm, but then the Russians spot the missiles, and the
entire task group and the SAMs on the neighbouring island light up, and
start flinging missiles in all directions. The last of the HARMs get
fired, the ES-3 yells out confirmation that the suspect carrier contact
really is the Kuznetsov, the Etendards salvo their 10 Exocets at it, and
then dive to flee north. After that it's all down to the missiles.

There are a colossal number of SAMs in the air, and the orbiting ESM
planes can see the light on the horizon flickering like a furious
thunderstorm as missiles get knocked down in rapid succession. The
destroyer in the path of the main missile stream gets run over and
smashed, and the bulk of the missiles home in on the two big adjacent
contacts - one of the Kirovs and a Slava. Their potent close defences
knock down many of my missiles, but they each take multiple hits, and
when their big ASMs explode they tear the entire ship apart in an
instant. Spillover missiles continue onwards, causing confusion in the
fleet, and two more escorts get hit and damaged. Almost all the missiles
headed for the Kusnetsov are shot down, but, by the sound of excited
voice chatter, at least two of the trailing Exocets hit the carrier, and
maybe one of the Harpoons too.

My planes continue to egress northwards at low level, before angling
east again and rising to tank up for the trip back to the carriers. As
they head out a pair of MiG-25s comes sniffing in from Rogachevo, but my
few F-14s are able to intercept them before they find any of my attack
planes. While the flights disperse and head back to their carriers,
staff analyze the data, and are pleased with the result. Confirmed kills
on a Kirov, a Slava, and a destroyer; one more destroyer heavily damaged
and in imminent danger of sinking, and one lightly damaged by a single
hit; the carrier lightly damaged, but apparently not significantly
impeded. They've lost about 40% of the task group sunk, their offensive
ASM power has dropped in about the same proportion, and they've used
copious quantities of SAMs. (Surviving postwar records reveal the
expenditure of a colossal 451 SAMs from ship and shore batteries, plus
64 bursts of gunfire of various types.)

The trouble is, I’ve also fired an enormous quantity of missiles.
Sinking those four ships took the expenditure of 68 Harpoons, 24 SLAMs,
58 HARMs, and 12 Exocets. I can do this again once, possibly twice, but
that would essentially strip me of anti-shipping weapons. However, I
really have to watch HARM and SLAM expenditure. If I'm tasked with
extensive ground attacks (such as against those new SAMs intel says are
arriving at Bardufoss, the triple SA-10 around Banak, or the SA-10/10/20
combo at Murmansk), then I'll have problems if I’ve used all my
munitions up against ships. So I may need to cut back on those.

**Bodo Area Attacks**

Further south, the Kennedy prepares for a follow-on attack on the Bodo
area, loading an assortment of munitions on its F-18s. The strike
doesn't launch immediately, since it is waiting for tankers to return
from the Murmansk attack, but it eventually gets underway and arrives in
the target area shortly before dawn.

Low level attacks find and kill the pair of Ganefs there,
cluster-bombing them without too much difficulty, as well as engaging
the surveillance radar further inland. However, as the F-18s pull out
from their Snakeye attack on the radar site, they spot an SA-6 a short
distance away, and decide to rush it at low level. This turns out to be
a bad decision. The SA-6 has an SA-15 in attendance, which opens fire,
and, as I react to that, three other SA-6 batteries reveal themselves in
succession. It looks like the entire east end of the Skjerstad Fjord is
a nest of medium-level SAMs, and I've flown right into it. The F-18s
twist and dodge as best they can amongst the hills, managing (with the
help of a loitering SEAD flight) to kill two of the batteries and wound
a third, but it's dawn now, and my planes no longer have the cover of
darkness. Chastened, they flee the scene as best they can, although not
all of them come home again. Lesson: stay the heck out of Soviet Army
tactical air defences.

Once the Ganefs are knocked down, the other F-18s come in to bomb the
big mountain shelter at Bodo using Walleyes, hoping their linear
shaped-charge warheads will be useful against the heavily protected
target. The results are indifferent, and I'm not even sure if anything
important is in the bunker, so I'm not confident it was worth the
munitions. One side-effect of the strike is that my passing planes spot
a Styx missile battery on the tip of the long narrow peninsula NW of
Bodo, and bomb that. HQ seems to think this was significant, so TARPS
birds are sent in to make low-level runs along the coast, looking for
more, but nothing turns up.

**Daytime Activity**

Most of the day is spent on admin and logistical activities;
re-organizing ASW zone boundaries, checking fuel levels, despatching
tankers, etc. The Clemenceau group is low on fuel, so she heads south
mid-morning, out of the line and towards the tankers waiting near Jan
Mayan at PL Bravo. Unfortunately she won't be getting any new munitions,
because her dedicated replenishers are over near the Foch, far to the
SE. She's got her last loadout of Exocets mounted on her Etendards, but
after that she'll only have conventional bombs. I'm bringing up another
French supply ship out of Brest, which is joining up with British supply
ships out of Portsmouth, but it'll be days before they reach the area.

LZ Baby Ice (the ASW helicopter base on Jan Mayan) is fully set up now,
so the Jeanne d'Arc gathers her task group and steams south for
Reykjavik. She'll refuel, and then come back with more supplies later in
the week. LZ Wolf Dance (the base on Greenland) is partly set up, and
the Raleigh is also ordered to Reykjavik immediately, while the other
cargo ships stay behind to continue unloading. There's no way I'm
sending her out alone in sub-infested waters, so the USS Caron (a
Spruance) goes with her as ASW escort. Unfortunately, this leaves the
remaining cargo ships only defended by a Perry, a second feeble gun
frigate of some sort, and the feebler little Biscuit-Tin (the
Beskytteren), which is cheerfully sailing around showing off its shiny
new (and operationally irrelevant) patrol helicopter. Of course, the
Groton is lurking under the ice immediately to the north, and the
Enterprise is keeping a CAP overhead, so maybe things aren't so bad.

ES-3s make a couple of radar reconnaissance runs towards Murmansk during
the day. They usually spot four or five radar contacts near the harbour,
but the enemy have their radars off, and my planes certainly don't get
close enough to try and ID them visually. We're loading Harpoons for
another big strike after dark, and hopefully that one will be enough to
neutralize their fleet. My F-14s are also operating in the area, making
a series of sweeps towards Rogachevo, where they manage to shoot down
some more of the MiG-25s.

**SLCMs**!

Around noon, the AEW helicopter from the Ark Royal gets a vampire
contact coming in from the north, sea-skimming at 500 knots, on a
bearing for the new airbase at Jan Mayan. Cruise missile! Scramble
orders immediately go out across the fleet, and AEW aircraft are pushed
northward, trying to get a better look at potential launch zones. Radar
operators search intently for the swarm of missiles following the first
one, but they don't find any. Just one missile. Can it be a nuke?

The Harriers swoop in and shoot it down easily enough, before climbing
to wait for orders. It's not long before there's another missile
contact, but this one is much farther to the east, north of the Vinson's
patrol area. AWACs operators track the missile flying west, before it
eventually turns south again towards Jan Mayan. It gets shot down too,
while the orbiting fighter pilots elsewhere wonder what's going on.

As this is happening, F-14s and S-3s from the Vinson are closing in on
the area where the missiles were spotted, and they detect the next
missile being launched. This lets the S-3 immediately head for the exact
location of what must be the Yankee Notch intel warned us about. The
F-14s dive in to shoot down the missiles as they are launched, until the
slower S-3 localizes the sub with a sonobuouy, and batters it to death
with a succession of three torpedoes.

(I added a Yankee Notch to my side and took a look at the default WRA.
WRA for the SS-21b is currently set for 1 missile per target, just like
the nuclear version. By comparison, the default setting for TLAMs is 2
missiles per target. If you want a massed salvo against the base you
would probably need to set the WRA to 'use all'. I think in my case I
had enough fighters up to catch all the missiles if they were salvoed,
but I probably would not have been able to find the sub.)

***Note: This is fixed but the maximum the Yankee Notch can fire in one
salvo is 8.***

**Intel Report**

The dinner-time intel report comes in, detailing more of the Warpac's
moves to firm up their defences in Norway. Most of it doesn't have an
immediate effect on my operations, but HQ is still discussing Russian
convoy operations, headed for Svalbard or possibly the other islands in
the Barents. I'm pretty sure this is the same convoy I sank already, but
what if I'm wrong? Additional MPA are sent to complete a full radar
sweep around Svalbard and the islands further NE (staying away from the
Rogachevo MiGs), but nothing turns up.

**Murmansk II, the Re-hittening**

As evening comes, my aircraft monitoring the Murmansk TG continue to
report intermittent radar contact with four ships, but we're not certain
exactly which ones they are. Has the Kuznetsov docked for repairs, or is
she still at sea? Are the big air-defence ships deployed nearby, or am I
just looking at a collection of destroyers? Do I launch a major strike
or not?

Therefore, my ES-3 is sent on a low altitude night reconnaissance run,
alone, defenceless, and radar off, hoping nothing decides to come
patrolling their way. Thirty miles out they gently climb until they just
clear the optical horizon and start scanning with their FLIR. The
carrier's still there, along with an Udaloy II and Sovremenny together
near the island, and a second Sovremenny (the damaged one?) further away
near the mainland shore. There's no sign of the other ships; the second
Kirov, and the second Slava are missing, which means they're probably
either docked, or possibly hidden behind the island.

It's definitely worth a strike on the carrier, so the sequence begins
again: tankers and support planes underway, strike aircraft up,
refuelling complete, and then the attack. I'm not bringing the French
this time. I only have one shot of Exocets left, so I'll reserve those
for the Kirov, when it reappears. This one's all Harpoons and HARMs. The
planes make it in without detection, find that there are now five
targets on radar, release their missiles and swing away.

The results are entirely satisfactory. With some of their major
air-defence ships destroyed, and some presumably away in dock, they have
fewer SAMs to hurl my way. Two Sovremennys, and two Udaloys are sunk,
and, fighting bravely but futilely against the flood, the Kuznetsov
succumbs to the barrage and sinks beneath the waves. There are still two
major combatants unaccounted for (the other Kirov and the other Slava),
and they do have a significant long-range anti-shipping punch, but they
will have to sortie to get to me, and I should be able to detect them in
advance if I maintain periodic radar patrols.

**Recce tasks**

As the day draws to a close, TARPS birds are sent out on recce missions
to Tromso and Bardufoss. Nothing new shows up at Tromso, but as the
pilot flies past the airbase he spots another radar in the hills about
20 miles to the SW. Turning to investigate, he’s fired on by a hidden
SA-6, but manages to dive away on burner and break LOS. Radioing the
warning back to HQ, he gets asked to recce the next fjord over, where
the Harrier was shot down two days ago.

Booming down the fjord at supersonic speed, he spots the hidden SA-6,
and blows past it before it can react. A minute later he catches a
glimpse of a concentration of vehicles on the east bank, but he’s gone
before he can recognize them. Back at base, analysis of the tapes shows
them to be bridging equipment, and thus well worth hitting. The F-18s on
the distant Enterprise are brought in, and once again use small LGBs
from the safety of high altitude to wreck the engineering truck park.

**Tomorrow**?

Plans for tomorrow are uncertain, and will probably consist mainly of
monitoring the situation at sea (HQ still insists there’s a convoy out
there), and maintaining barrier patrols against subs. The next major
land target would be Banak, which doesn’t seem to have much air activity
at the moment. It’s got at least three SA-10 surrounding it, so it might
be a tough target for little reward. Time will tell.

**DAY 6 (March 23 1994)**

**Activity at Murmansk**

The day starts with the last of my strike aircraft returning to the
carriers, and the assembled tankers dispersing and heading back to their
bases. A TARPs bird has just completed its run of the Bardufoss area,
planning teams are debating what to load for the day's activity, and
things are generally quiet.

That's when my forward AWACS gets an extreme-range bogey contact over
the Murmansk area, and it's not acting like the occasional ELINT Badgers
that I've been ignoring. Then there's a second one. And a third. And a
fourth. They're not headed out to a patrol area. Instead they're
orbiting tightly over the airbase. This looks very much like a bomber
strike forming up. Oh heck.

If these are bombers, I want to meet them as far out as possible, so my
closest carriers (Vinson and Nimitz) launch three flights of
Sparrow-armed F-14s and send some of them overland across Finland, and
others along the coast (skirting the Banak SAMs), to cut off the enemy
as soon as possible. I'm going to need fuel, but I've only got one
half-empty tanker nearby, and all the other ones are well on their way
home, and will take hours to recycle once they get there. Orders go out
for the UK-bound tankers to turn around, and start heading north again,
with the KC-135s offloading their remaining fuel to the VC-10s, and the
VC-10s pressing on to meet my carriers. Those two tankers, now 85% full,
will be all I'll get for the next few hours. Meanwhile, the count of
orbiting planes continues to rise.

The F-14s continue to head east, radars off, hoping to ID the orbiting
bombers with their nose-mounted cameras before they are spotted
themselves. They approach nervously, all too aware that there’s an SA-20
lurking out there somewhere, until they finally resolve their targets.
They're not bombers at all! It's a tight wagon-wheel of Su-27s, orbiting
the Murmansk airbases. This is a bit of a conundrum. I'm outnumbered,
they have better long-range missiles than I do, they're fuel-rich over
their airbases, and I know there's at least one SA-20 and SA-10 in the
region. Charging in is out of the question.

What are they doing? They're awfully close-in for an effective CAP.
Could they be waiting to escort some bombers I haven't spotted yet? Were
they supposed to have gone to the carrier? (Can't be - they're the wrong
model, I think.) Or ferried to one of the airbases I've bombed? It's
perplexing. My piqued pilots start to pull back, shooting down a couple
of Badgers on the way out to make themselves feel better. Meanwhile the
planning staff starts trying to figure out how to get the Flankers out
of there. They certainly have the potential to make a mess out of my
operations over the Barents.

**New Plan**

My intention of having an ‘easy day’, idly hunting convoys and maybe
wondering about considering thinking of Banak goes out the window. If
the Soviets are bringing in new units of high-quality aircraft, or
getting their bombers ready to go, then the last thing I need is
something new in Banak. Banak must go, and it must go soon.
Unfortunately, that means a daylight attack, against a heavily defended
airbase. The orders go out.

The Roosevelt will immediately conduct an SEAD strike on the
concentration of SA-6s deployed around the south end of the Lyngen
fjord, and the SA-12 that’s up in the mountains to the NE. Kennedy will
immediately conduct follow-on SEAD strikes on the SA-6s near Bodo. While
that’s underway, A-6 units will reload for heavy SEAD work, with a
combination of HARMs and SLAMs, except for those carrying heavy LGBs for
use against the Banak runways. F-18s will load for high-altitude
anti-SHORADS work (Mavericks, LGBs), on the assumption the A-6s will be
able to knock back the SA-10s around the airbase before they arrive, and
they can tackle the SA-15s that are sure to be there. If all goes to
plan, the Banak strike will arrive in two waves (SEAD, then bombing) a
few hours after dawn.

**Lyngen Fjord and related SEAD**

The Lyngen Fjord attack goes well; much better than the SA-6s I stumbled
into down near Bodo. This time I already know where all three SA-6s and
the SA-12 are, so my pilots can plot low-level routes through the dark
valleys, popping up over ridgelines, and dashing into minimum range
before the batteries can react. The SA-12 dies in a rain of
cluster-bombs, and the three SA-6s suffer similar fates to Snakeye
impacts. The fourth SA-6, tucked into the deep valley near the village
of Birtavarre is an unwelcome surprise, but the SAM gunner’s hasty shot
misses, and the last of the batteries there is destroyed moments later.

The attacks are so rapid that the escorting HARMs never have a chance to
fire, so they are vectored NE towards Banak. One plane fires a
speculative BOL shot towards the nearest SA-10, and when it fires back,
the remaining HARMs are salvoed towards it. As far as we can tell, some
of them came close enough to damage the battery, so the upcoming Banak
attack may go more smoothly than anticipated.

Further south, the F-18s from the Kennedy make a similar attack on the
remaining SA-6s around Bodo. They arrive later, when it’s already light,
and don’t do quite as well, expending a lot more ordnance to accomplish
the same thing. The discovery of an additional SA-15 doesn’t help, but
they manage to kill it as well.

**Flankers from Murmansk**

While preparations for the Banak strike get underway on the distant
carriers, one of the ES-3s is sent along the Barents coast again,
checking for any Russian naval activity, particularly a sortie by the
two powerful cruisers in Murmansk. The waters are clear, but the ESM
operators are suddenly alarmed when they pick up fighter radars
launching out of Murmansk. The new Flankers there are active again.

While the ES-3 dives for the deck and hurries out to sea, the orbiting
AWACs starts to get a better picture of the enemy activity. There’s only
two Flankers, and they don’t seem to be interested in my planes. They’re
on a straight-line course for Bardufoss. Could they be ferrying there to
reinforce? But Bardufoss’ runways are cratered. Aren’t they?

A returning TARPS bird is hastily vectored to a tanker, and then makes a
burner dash into Bardufoss, arriving a few minutes before the incoming
Soviet fighters. It hurtles across the airfield, just above the ceiling
of the 57mm AAA which infests the area – but not above the 100mm guns
which are mixed in among them! Thick black flack bursts envelop the
aircraft, and fragments rattle against the fuselage, but luckily the
damage is minor, and the pilot makes it out with the news that yes, the
runways are still wrecked.

F-14s advance to deal with the pair of fighters, and manage to take them
down without loss, although it takes 2:1 numerical superiority and a lot
of running away to pull it off. It’s not long before AWACS reports
another pair launching from Murmansk and headed this way.

**Banak Strike**

The Flankers’ timing is rotten, because my Banak strike is forming up
over the ocean near Tromso now, and readying to advance on Banak.
Flankers headed from Murmansk to Bardufoss will almost certainly spot
them and attack. I have no choice but to feed most of my
Sparrow-carrying Tomcats from Vinson and Nimitz into the fray, in a
protracted battle in Finland to protect the SE flank of my assault.

I’m expecting the eight Flankers I saw flying before, but in the end I
have to fight sixteen of them, and although I typically have two or
three times as many fighters engaged as they do, plus a pair of jammers,
they still manage to extract their pound of flesh. Their missiles
out-range mine, their countermeasures are comprehensive, and their
maneuverability is excellent. Most of all, I hate their long-ranged
IR-guided missiles. The ‘no Phoenix’ limit is really making it tough to
deal with these guys.

The strike itself finds modest SAM resistance at Banak; certainly less
than I had anticipated. There are two SA-10s still active, and a pair of
SA-8s at the base itself, but that is all. No SA-6s or SA-11s, no SA-4s
lurking in the background, and no nasty SA-15s to guard the others. The
strike stays high, using HARMs to cripple the SA-10s, and a combination
of SLAMs, Mavericks, and LGBs to destroy the remains of the defences.
Then the A-6s are able to advance and reliably deliver their penetrating
LGBs to crater the runway and taxiway, and destroy the hangar. One
MiG-25 is spotted in the open and destroyed, but that is the only plane
seen on the site.

**Back to Svalbard**

Every morning, for the last few days, I’ve gotten a contact report from
Svalbard at dawn, telling me about the AAA defences spotted at the end
of the runway. This is a sitrep from one of the two Harrier pilots who
survived being shot down in the initial attacks. These two airmen,
code-named ‘Beagle’ and ‘Vigdis’, have been sneaking into town to swipe
potatoes and borscht from the apathetic Soviet garrison, in the hopes
that they can evade capture until the war is over.

I’d essentially given them up as lost, until, five-days later, I finally
realize that I have the means to get to them. The two SAR Sea Kings on
the Ark Royal have an exceptionally long range, and they can actually
reach Svalbard (barely) if the carrier is at the very north edge of its
patrol zone. The destination is still infested with AAA, so they need
some help, and the Enterprise, with it’s F-18s already loaded with small
LGBs, is perfect for the job.

While the Enterprise and the Ark Royal steam north towards Svalbard, a
tanker, a Canberra, and a U-2 take off from southern bases. I’ve tried
to use the Canberras over Norway, with limited success, and I haven’t
used the U-2 yet at all, because it’s simply too vulnerable to risk with
heavy SAMs around. However, Svalbard is a more permissive environment,
and the recce planes arrive and begin to provide useful overwatch.

By mid-afternoon the tanker is there, dragging in the Enterprise’s
F-18s, which begin to pummel the remaining AAA, some trapped aircraft
and airfield facilities, as well as some dispersed units which seem to
be part of some sort of ELINT / COMINT formation. The SAR helicopters
arrive an hour later, under the watchful eye of more Maverick-toting
F-18s, and make the extraction in good time. They keep the doors open as
they fly home. After five days in the field, the rescued airmen add a
lot to the atmosphere…

**Afternoon Activity**

Other than the Svalbard rescue, there are also some low priority attack
activities in the afternoon.

The Roosevelt’s F-18s start bashing away at the AAA around Bardufoss
with 2,000lb iron bombs. There’s a set of POW barracks nearby, and I may
need a clear field of operation if I need to mount a rescue. The Mk 84s
actually work quite well, as any reasonably close hit will smash a gun,
and they’re considerably cheaper than guided weapons.

The distant Kennedy launches another follow-up attack on Bodo, in the
south, using much more expensive Walleye glide bombs to finish
destroying the mountain-side shelter, and a few of the hardened aircraft
shelters. It’s a slow and costly process, usually taking two or three
hits to eliminate a single HAS, and I may call it off as not worth the
effort.

The Raleigh and Caron make it back to Reykjavik and dock for refuelling,
while the Caron starts filling her VLS with TLAMs. The Jeanne d’Arc and
Argus are almost back too, and should dock around midnight. The CP-140s
have just arrived from Canada, and are now setting up their ASW patrol
zone. I’ve also got some replacement fighters flying in from Stateside,
to be forwarded to the carriers tonight.

On the other side of the theatre, coastal convoys along the west side of
the UK are consolidating and moving north, preceded by the Trafalgar,
which has finished its resupply and is headed back to the fight. I’ve
actually got a lot of high-value shipping here; 3 T-AOs, 2 Durances, and
a pair of Rovers, and they only have one ASW frigate to guard them.
Fortunately, HMS Cornwall has excellent sonar, and I’ll be able to give
them lots of MPA support. TG de Ruyter is also coming south to meet
them, and take some of them north to PL Beta.

**Submarine Activity**

My subs continue to patrol quietly. None of them have seen any sign of
the enemy, above or below the layer. I’m starting to think the Russians
are slowing their submarine activity too, with no sightings all day, but
that thought changes mid-afternoon, when a fast-moving SSN is detected
by direct-path contact, only 18 miles N of the Nimitz, and headed our
way. Most of the Nimitz’s S-3s are away guarding TG Whitney, but
fortunately there’s still one ready on deck. It’s shot off immediately,
and firewalls the throttles to get to the closing sub as soon as
possible. It takes all four torpedoes to sink what turns out to be a
Sierra II. It’s never a good thing to have a modern sub that close to a
carrier, but fortunately it doesn’t seem to have called any friends.

When the evening intel briefing arrives, we get word that we can expect
more visitors. There’s a Charlie coming home west of Iceland, and a
number of subs have been spotted coming out of the Kola inlet, including
the unique Papa SSGN. Planning staff are considering whether to redeploy
some of our ASW /assets in light of this news, when the Nimitz’s S-3s
pick up and sink another SSN cruising in at 15 kts from the ENE. That’s
two in the same area, coming around the top of Norway. Looks like the
intel boys have the sub surge correct, and the planning staff continue
to move more /assets to the area.

(Postwar analysis shows that the S-3’s sonar operator had misidentified
the unfamiliar evening contact as an SSN. It was actually the Papa, sunk
before we knew exactly what it was.)

The next SSN shows up only 15 miles NE of the Nimitz, around 23:00 hrs,
obligingly right next to an S-3 headed out for its turn on patrol. I’m
getting a little worried that all these are direct path contacts. I had
high hopes for creeping along with my towed arrays, and getting lots of
warning, but so far CZ contacts just aren’t happening. As the S-3 is
sinking the Victor, another Goblin is spotted in the Denmark strait,
right where the intel boys predicted the Charlie to be. Are they
psychic? Not this time. It’s just another whale…

**Plans**

The intel briefing has a few other points of interest. The Soviet
withdrawal in southern Norway is ongoing, which is good. As part of
this, it sounds like they’ve been minelaying off Narvik – fortunately
that’s somebody else’s problem. HQ confirms that the Svalbard convoy
they’ve been talking about is indeed the one we’ve already met, so
things are going well there.

My intention for tonight is to stand down and have no major strikes.
Although, in theory, we could maintain multiple strikes per day, in
practice the men need time to rest. Reconnaissance and ASW will
continue, of course, but, unless there is an operational emergency, the
strike planes will not fly.

The Soviet airbases in Norway and Svalbard have been cratered, and the
fighters in Murmansk seem to have calmed down. I haven’t had any recent
indications of fighter activity out of Rogachevo either. Next strikes
could conceivably be the airfield complex around Murmansk, but an
assault into a heavily defended part of Russia would be a massive
undertaking, and possibly a bit premature. Rogachevo would be a very
long haul with tankers, but it’s looking interesting. It’s definitely a
thorn in the flank of any move on Murmansk, it gives the Russians air
cover over a good part of the Barents, and its small enough that I might
be able to tackle it. Planning staff are asked to conduct a feasibility
study.

We shall see…

A little more time to play, so here's another day's worth of 'Tour de
Force'.

**DAY 7 (Mar 24 1994)**

**Southern Theatre**

It's a calm night in the southern part of my theatre, as the aircrew get
a much needed rest. ASW patrols continue uneventfully, and radar
reconnaissance into the Barents finds no shipping. The Jeanne d'Arc and
friends finish replenishing at Reykjavik, and head back north to take a
new load of supplies to the helicopter bases on Greenland and Jan Mayan.
The Arc Royal is heading south to refuel, and should complete the
operation shortly after noon. Way down south, the cruiser Worden is
nearly ready to dock in America.

Operations resume at dawn, as 'airfield cleanup' attacks recommence.
A-6s and F-18s bombard the AAA defences at Andoya and Bardufoss with
heavy iron bombs, and even try cracking some of the hardened aircraft
shelters, with limited success, F-18s from the Kennedy visit Bodo with
another load of Walleyes, and succeed in wrecking more of the shelters
there. It's expensive, but the captain has the munitions, and dammit,
he's determined to use them! Interestingly, I find I'm keeping a large
proportion of my A-6s loaded for anti-shipping duty. Those two heavy
cruisers in Murmansk are having a distinct "fleet in being" effect on my
operations.

**Morning Submarines**

My submarines finally get into the action when the sonar operator on the
Turbulent, just south of PL Delta, gets a CZ contact on a moving sub.
It's fairly noisy too, and they rapidly identify it as a Yankee Notch.
They could spend a few hours closing in and hunting it down, but that's
risky with a long-range cruise missile carrier, which could launch a
barrage at any time. So, with a resigned sigh, the captain orders the
masts up, and sends a call to the carriers. Soon F-14s are orbiting
overhead (to catch any missile launches), while the S-3s close in and
localize and sink the sub. The Turbulent monitors it all on sonar,
sending occasional position updates, until the Americans have finished
stealing his kill.

The Brits get a kill of their own, later in the morning, when a Nimrod
suddenly gets a radar contact in the open waters between Iceland and
Norway. Somebody's snorkelling! It turns out to be an old Whiskey, and
she comes to a sudden end when the Stingray hits home. (This is the
first snorkeller in six days - I had expected to see more.)

**Rogachevo - initial operations**

Phase 1 of the Rogachevo begins with a fighter sweep deep into the
Barents. Two flights of F-14s precede an S-3, which checks out Murmansk
(nothing there, although one of the cruisers' helicopters is up), and
then goes further east, well within range of the two known surveillance
radars on Rogachevo. They find a Stenka ASW patrol boat, waiting
motionless in the mouth of the Kola inlet, but nothing else is about. As
the S-3 sweeps north up the coast of Novaya Zemlya, the F-14s approach
Rogachevo, and fly ostentatiously back and forth outside of SA-2 range,
radars blaring. Nothing comes up to challenge them. Is it possible enemy
fighter operations there have been curtailed?

Satisfied that the area is reasonably safe, the F-14s fall back to
refuel, and this time they return with the U-2 far overhead, and a pair
of SLAM-carrying A-6s. The intention is for the U-2 to take a quick
look, and then for the A-6s to split north and south of Rogachevo, and
engage the pair of surveillance radars there. However, what the U-2
finds calls for a hasty change of plans. Rogachevo is packed with enemy
planes! There are twenty of them, most of them look like MiG-25s, and
ramp space is so limited that they're jammed in three or four to a
tarmac space. Oh, and there's an SA-10 (or better) parked in the open
about 15 miles W of the airbase.

Hitting the radars was a sensible plan, but these new targets are too
rich to ignore. The A-6s fire their missiles, bringing them in from the
north and the south, behind terrain where the SA-10 can't see them, and
direct them into the densest concentration of fighters. The missiles get
spotted a few miles out, and two Foxbats scramble immediately, but
they're too late to be in position, and the SLAMs are below SA-2 height.
Four impacts rock the base, blasting flaming chunks of MiG in all
directions, and starting secondary fires amongst adjacent aircraft.
Later photo reconnaissance will record 13 wrecked airframes scattered
around the airfield, which is a very satisfactory result.

The remaining MiGs don't take this offence lightly, but the waiting
F-14s shoot down the first two while the A-6s complete their escape. A
few minutes later they have to turn back and fight again when another
two Foxbats make a Mach 2+ afterburner dash to try and catch my retiring
planes. Radars from two more are also detected briefly, but they don't
pursue, and my planes retire to tank and return home.

**Svalbard Port**

HQ has issued an alpha-strike request for Svalbard, and we’ve already
visited it twice, to shut the runways and recover our crewmen. However,
in all of those strikes we’ve left the naval facilities alone, presuming
they’d be useful in recapturing the island. However, this time HQ has
specifically asked for the target to be Longyearbyen Port, so the
Enterprise dispatches some more F-18s, which destroy the facilities with
LGBs.

**Afternoon Admin**

Afternoon brings some reconnaissance, some patrolling out towards
Rogachevo, the shootdown of another pair of MiG-25s out there, and the
polite cough of the Vinson’s liaison officer inquiring “By the way, sir,
did you realize our magazines are completely out of Sparrows?” It seems
all the heavy fighting with Su-27s and MiG-25s has used them up! The
admiral heaves a heavy sigh, and proceeds to the next re-organization.
Enterprise, the ‘spare’ carrier, is ordered to come back east and
relieve Vinson. She’s been guarding the ASW bases from air attack, but
with two Yankee Notch subs claimed killed, the threat is probably
reduced enough to let her go. When she gets to Vinson’s patrol area,
Vinson will head south for a fresh load of missiles.

In the meantime, the replacement fighters from the States (2 F-14s, 3
F-18s) are ordered to fly to the Roosevelt, pick up loads of missiles,
and bring them back to Reykjavik. They will then operate out of Iceland,
and take over the CAP mission for the Greenland ASW base from the
departing Enterprise.

Ongoing airfield bombardment cracks a few more shelters at Bodo and
Andoya, and the U-2 comes in for a recce survey of Norway. It finds a
few damaged air defence elements, including what looks like an
SA-10-sized unit east of Bodo, which is a bit of a surprise. I thought
everything there was dead.

**Evening Attack**

The Rogachevo attack follows a similar pattern to the morning strike,
except with more planes involved. HARMs do the usual suppression of the
surveillance radars and SA-10 site, while low-flying F-18s with cluster
bombs ruin the SA-2s from the north and south. A-6s with iron bombs
contribute to the general mayhem, polishing off surviving SAM sites, and
working over some communications vans the U-2 has spotted scattered
around the area. One MiG-25 is spotted on the tarmac, and quickly
destroyed, and then high-altitude A-6s use their heavy LGBs to crater
the runway and taxiway.

There don’t seem to be any Russian aircraft operating in the region, so
it seems safe for some of the A-6s to be diverted to sink the ASW patrol
boat which was spotted earlier. That done, the entire package is on the
way home shortly after midnight.

**Plans for tomorrow**

At the moment, I don’t have any major strikes planned, aside from
ongoing airfield cleanup and destruction of residual air defences. I
will continue to guard resupply groups, replenish my ships, and conduct
ASW patrols. The possibility of bomber strikes still exists, as does a
sortie of the Murmansk group (which the U-2 confirms includes the Kirov,
Slava, and a Sovremenny – so a very potent surface punch), but I think
if I am vigilant I should be able to meet them at range, where I should
have the advantage. It is not my intention to strike Murmansk itself,
unless ordered by HQ. All subject to change, of course. Tomorrow is
another day.

And here's the last few days.

**DAY 8 (Mar 25 1994)**

Day 8 turns out to be uneventful, dominated by maintenance,
replenishment, and ongoing patrolling. Soviet aircraft continue to avoid
the theatre, and the Kirov is still playing Tirpitz up in Murmansk, and
won't come out to fight. A few small raids kill some more hardened
shelters and damaged air-defence units, but there is no significant
fighting.

In logistical operations, Jeanne d'Arc arrives at Wolf Dance in the
morning, and makes the first of her resupply runs. The freighters there
are nearly done setting up the base, so she'll hang around for a day and
escort them south tomorrow when their job is finished. Enterprise
relieves Vinson in Patrol Zone Papa, and the Vinson heads south for
refuelling and a fresh load of Sparrows. The Argus reaches Baby Ice (Jan
Mayan) in the evening, and starts offloading some supplies.

HQ has requested mining operations in the channel leading to Narvik. I
do have Quickstrike mines, but they're buried in the bottom of one of my
munitions ships hanging around south-west of Jan Mayan. I suppose I
could try and hustle over and rendezvous with a carrier, dig the mines
out, and rope them over. Or I could just whistle up a B-52 and have them
do it for me. The approval process is slow, but it beats doing it
myself, and the mining should happen tomorrow.

**DAY 9 (Mar 26 1994)**

The operational tempo for Day 9 is much like Day 8, and the Soviets take
no notable offensive action. The ships at Wolf Dance finish their
base-building operation, and head for Reykjavik, escorted by the Jeanne
d’Arc group. They will refuel there, before heading back to
Newfoundland. The Groton is finally released from its under-ice guard
position, having met nothing, and proceeds north to its intended patrol
zone, now a week behind schedule. Vinson picks up its Sparrows and some
fuel, and heads north again, leaving some of my tankers to head south to
top up from the T-AOs south of PL Alpha. The B-52 finally shows up,
makes its minelaying run, and flies back to England in time for tea.

One unusual combat tasking comes in, when we are asked to destroy an
SS-21 unit in northern Norway, but with a very awkward and unwieldy
weapon; a massive C-130-delivered Daisy Cutter. It seems that, in a fit
of hysterical political over-reaction, the governments are frightened
that the missiles might have nuclear or chemical warheads whose residue
could be problematic, unless properly incinerated. Set aside the fact
that we’ve been filling the oceans with wrecked nuclear reactors and
broken tac-nukes, and littering the land with toxic compounds from
ordnance and destroyed infrastructure… These missiles could be
dangerous!

F-14 TARPs birds set out to find the missiles, and they turn out to be
near where we destroyed an SA-12 a few days back, which explains why
that missile system had been in an otherwise unremarkable place. The
SA-12 may be gone, but there are a number of MANPADS and AAA units in
the area, so F-18s come in with small LGBs to destroy them from safe
altitude. Once everything’s secure, the C-130 makes its run and
completes the destruction of the missiles.

**DAY 10 (Mar 27 1994)**

The operational slowdown continues into Day 10. Ongoing patrols and
replenishment activity continue, but no major strikes or movements are
currently planned. It looks like the pace on the ground will dictate the
posture of the fleet, until new plans and priorities are established.

And that is that! I think this is the second-longest scenario I’ve
played, only behind the trans-Atlantic convoy scenario NF 12.6. Thanks
very much for writing such a long and complex scenario for us.

**General Impressions**

This is a very interesting and involved scenario. I like big scenarios,
and this one definitely qualifies! It's great to see large-scale
movements of ships and forces over time, and fuel and supply status
really start to change the equation at this scale. It takes a lot of
planning to make it run well, and I'm not sure I ever had my refuelling
priorities fully figured out, despite my attempts with extra
spreadsheets and charts. My ASW planning needed some help too, and my
attempts to set up effective MPA barrier patrols were constantly being
ruined by the need to cover the isolated tankers which didn't have
effective escorts. I don't think I'd describe the scenario as just
maintaining pressure or doing economy-of-force actions. You're
definitely engaged in a series of aggressive heavy assaults throughout
the scenario.

It’s funny, that for all the work which we went to to set up those ASW
stations, they never detected a single sub! I had been expecting a surge
of old diesels and Echoes and Novembers to hunt down, but that never
happened.

Munitions constraints were an issue in the early game, when low AAM
stocks forced me to put many of my forward deployed fighters onto ferry
missions, simply because they didn't have the missiles to allow full
loadouts. (I used a lot of missiles to stop the Oscar strike, which put
a strain on things.) The Enterprise had over a third of its F-14s and
F-18s sitting idle for just this reason, and many of the others were on
sub-optimal loadouts. The Roosevelt had the same problem, to a lesser
degree. An escorted bomber strike at this pont could have been
problematic. By day 3/4 I was better off, fat and happy with plenty of
missiles and full loadouts. By day 5 I was nervous about HARMs again,
after using so many against the Murmansk group, but doing an inventory
showed the situation wasn't crippling. Vinson ran out of Sparrows on Day
7, after heavy air-to-air fighting in the Barents, but was able to
resupply before it became an issue. I never did send any ships to Rota
for SAMs. It was simply too far away, and since there didn't seem to be
any bomber raids, and I hadn't used any against the Oscars, the need
wasn't acute.

Lack of TLAMs certainly changed my tactics. No more airfield saturation
attacks here! Instead, it was SEAD with HARMs, and a lot more low-level
CBU and Snakeye work than I normally use, followed by LGBs on the
runways. Even when my additional TLAMs arrived I held off using them (or
the CALCMs), preferring to keep them in case I needed to mount a major
attack on Russian airbases.

Fuel constraints weren't too bad, largely because most of my
carrier-group movements were at a low-speed submarine-hunting creep. If
I'd been cruising, then I'd have had to be off-station for fuel a lot
more often. The American carriers were dominated by munitions
requirements, so they got their fuel as a byproduct of munitions
replenishment. The northern UK and French carriers cut it close, waiting
until day 4/5/6 to refuel. My biggest refueling problem was the
difficulty of finding relatively rare diesel fuel. Long live the
Preserver! (Of course, if CMO eventually implements aviation fuel limits
for ships, then the fuel constraint situation will get a lot more
critical.)

Five American carrier groups have a tremendous amount of stomping power,
even when they're somewhat fuel and munitions constrained. Once they
were all on-station and resupplied, the power they could bring to bear
was colossal. The player should be able to kick the doors in on any
particular target - provided they've paid for tankers! Without them
things get much much harder. If I hadn't had those 10 KC-135s, then it
would have been a very different story. I had heavily loaded planes
making trips of over 1100 miles each way to participate in the
six-carrier strike which cracked the Murmansk group. Three VC-10s and a
handful of S-3s could not have handled that! So, the player's tanker
choices are crucial.

Balance was pretty good for most of the game, which I think is hard to
predict in long scenarios. At the end the player eventually gains
overwhelming advantage (in a way which probably couldn't happen in real
life), so the last few days were essentially unopposed. As a
micromanager, I probably had a little more than I needed, and players
relying only on missions will find it more difficult than I did. I think
the Phoenix restriction is really good, and it forced me to adopt
different, and more interesting tactics. In particular, it made Su-27s
and MiG-25s into much tougher targets, since I couldn't stand off
outside the range of their pernicious long-ranged IR missiles. I think
the player may actually have more air-launched anti-shipping missiles
than they need. There are a lot of Harpoons and Exocets out there (plus
SLAMs, although I was more frugal with those), and I never truly felt
like I was running out until after the Murmansk group had been
neutralized. A few less missiles might make it more likely for the
Russians to survive long enough to bring the Kuznetsov and friends out
to fight. (Of course if you lose a carrier or two, then so much for
those Harpoons…)

I should really guard my harbours more carefully. I lost one T-AO to the
Tango at Reykjavik, and nearly lost a chunk of TG Algonquin to the Kilo
in the same place a day later. It was certainly a relief when the
Spruances started arriving in that area. Fortunately there was nothing
lurking in the approaches to Faslane or Portsmouth, and I spent a lot of
MPA time checking for visitors there.
