**Northern Fury 13, Cutting the Tether**

**AAR By Joel Radunzel**

First Post

This scenario takes place simultaneously with the start of the last AAR
(Here Comes the Cavalry). The Soviets have been using the captured
airbase on the tiny island of Jan Mayen in the Norwegian Sea (see
previous AAR, A Cold and Lonely Place) to ferry aircraft to Iceland.
This has allowed them to amass an impressive air strength on Iceland in
the past week. The mission is to cut this tether back to the Kola so
that the carriers and the USAF can go about reducing the Soviet defenses
on Iceland.

Jan Mayen island is essentially two dormant volcanoes connected by a
narrow isthmus of black, volcanic sand. The southwestern volcano is the
significantly smaller of the two mountains and the gravel runway, along
with the Soviet airbase facilities, the pier, and the fuel pipeline out
to sea, all sit in the isthmus. The Russians have positioned a
surveillance radar on the southwestern mountain and a limited number of
infantrymen are patrolling the lower-lying areas.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf13\nf13_jr\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.35347in" alt="A picture containing graphical user interface Description automatically generated" />

The long hull *Sturgeon*-class (*Archerfish*-class) submarine USS
*Batfish*, supported by the *688*-class USS *Oklahoma City*, are tasked
with reducing the Soviet facilities on Jan Mayen. More specifically, the
forty Navy SEALS in *Batfish*’s new bulbous diving chamber have the
mission of neutralizing Jan Mayen, assisted by *Oklahoma City*’s
Tomahawks. The plan is for them to put ashore and neutralize the “Box
Spring” surveillance radar on the island, which will allow the cruise
missiles to approach the island without being detected and engaged by
the Soviet SA-3 battery defending the facilities. After the strike, the
SEALs will close in and clean up what the Tomahawks missed. This all
needs to be complete and the SEALs off the island before daybreak, eight
hours from now.

Can the SEALs prevail against the elements, the Russians, and time to
cut the Soviet tether and give the carriers further south a chance? Read
on to find out!

Second Post

The screw of USS *Batfish* silently beat the black waters of the
Norwegian Sea as she crept silently past the southwestern tip of Jan
Mayen. The American submarine was running shallow, had been for the last
several hours as her captain had used the advanced optics in his
periscope to gather all the information he could about the island that
was such a key link in the Soviets’ aerial bridge to Iceland. For once
things were going well. Arc lights and poor Soviet light discipline at
the pier that extended away from the island’s isthmus had allowed the
captain to discern that a tanker was even now offloading fuel into the
pipeline that paralleled that long, manmade sliver of gravel and black
volcanic rock. Given the primitive conditions up here, and the
absolutely horrific working conditions (it was -28 degrees C above the
waves), the captain judged that she would likely be here for several
more hours before starting the cold voyage back to the Kola. If
everything worked as intended, the captain mused, it would be a lot
longer than that before she ever left this rock.

The low-light and thermal viewers in the periscope had also revealed an
icebreaker anchored off the southern side of island’s isthmus,
accompanied by what the captain judged to be a *Pauk*-class corvette.
Neither vessel was underway, and the captain guessed that their crews
were doing their best to huddle inside the hull away from the icy wind
that was blowing across the water. The captain had also seen what he
assumed were Russian soldiers, heavily bundled against the cold,
trudging along the island’s southern rim. He didn’t envy them their
duty, but these men with rifles were actually the greatest threat to the
accomplishment of his mission. If they were on their game…

The captain looked at his watch, then at his boat’s position on the map
plot in front of him in the control room. It was time, he judged. The
captain picked up his boat’s intercom and called back to an officer
waiting at the escape hatch behind the conning tower.

“Tell those frogmen they are clear to start the insertion. Launch the
boats!”

In the diving chamber, a long, rounded hump on Batfish’s back behind the
sub’s conning tower, a dozen elite commandos in drysuits put their scuba
breathing apparatus in their mouths, then began the process of exiting
the metal tube that had been their home since they had joined this
special mission boat in Scotland days before. Once in the breathtakingly
cold and black waters outside the chamber, the SEALs kicked the few
meters upwards to the surface and broached. Then they began working
fast. Two of the men pulled lanyards on drum-like packs that they had
brought with them. The two objects hissed into shape as a pair of
zodiacs. Two more of the men attached small outboard motors onto the
craft, then each of the dozen men climbed in. Within a few short
minutes, the first dozen commandos were skimming across the rolling
blackness of the sea towards the even blacker outline of Jan Mayen.

Third Post

The two Zodiaks rode up onto the icy black sand beach on the western tip
of Jan Mayen, and the SEALs piled out, yanking their packs and two bulky
tubes out as well. As the commandos removed their weapons from
waterproof bags, the Zodiacs turned about and sped back to seaward to
rendezvous with Batfish. Four more teams of SEALs would land on the
island in the next half hour. The first dozen men did not wait for them,
however. Instead, they donned white camouflage smocks, cradled their
weapons, and started up the snowy flanks of the Sor-Jan Mountain.

The SEALs scanned into the night through their night vision goggles as
they walked. The wind shrieked around them out of the north, almost
cutting through their layers clothes, which each man had donned
hurriedly at the beach. They continued to climb until the point man
quickly raised his hand in the signal to halt. The squad froze. Then the
point man pointed ahead.

There, four hundred meters ahead, just around the flank of the mountain,
rotated their objective. Sticking out of the top a large trailer, the
sail-like antenna of the “Bed Spring” air search radar turned in lazy
circles, silently sending electromagnetic radiation into the sky. Slowly
the commandos crept forward now. Closer inspection showed a large tent
nearby, likely housing the relief crew and a security team. The SEALs
took up positions in an arc around the site. One team lugged the two
tubes forward. A man mounted one in a launcher, and the brand-new
Javelin missile, one of the first prototypes to make its way into
soldiers’ hands, was ready for use. Then the men waited in the wind and
blowing snow.

By now the four other teams were moving along the northern beach of the
island towards the isthmus. They encountered no patrols, and quickly
reached their own positions. One four-man recon team perched on a ledge
overlooking the anchorage on the south side of the isthmus, noting the
tanker still unloading fuel among the arc lights at the pier, as well as
the icebreaker and the *Pauk* rocking at anchor further out. A second
four-man recon team crawled up to the low ridge north of the airfield
and looked down. Through their night vision they could see four MiG-23
fighters parked along the gravel runway. Ten temporary weather shelters
lined the northern side of the strip, and a collection of construction
vehicles, clearly intended to extend the runway during the short
daylight hours, sat idle at the western end of the gravel. To the left a
small tent city sat dark and silent against the howling wind. Finally,
the vehicles of the SA-3 battery and its supporting ZSU-23-2
anti-aircraft dotted the snow around the whole site.

The recon teams radioed their observations, along with precise targeting
coordinates, back to the raid’s commander, who was with the team
watching the Box Spring radar. Behind the recon elements, two more
ten-man assault teams waited for the order to rush forward. All was
ready.

On top of Sor-Jan, the raid commander finished typing the last
coordinates into his digital radio, then pressed the transmit button.
The signal shot out from the radio set at light speed. It arrived at a
dark mast that stuck up from the waves thirty miles south of the island.
From there, the message travelled to the comm room of the 688i-class
submarine USS *Oklahoma City*. In minutes the coordinates, which had
been expected, had been loaded into the guidance computers of sixteen
Tomahawk Land attack missiles, twelve in the boat’s VLS cells, and four
more in the torpedo room. The torpedo tubes themselves were filled with
the boat’s four Harpoon anti-ship missiles. Once all the weapons were
ready, Oklahoma City’s captain ordered his comms officer to broadcast a
single codeword on the same frequency from which they had received the
coordinates. Then he ordered, “Weps, fire tubes one through four with
the Harpoons on the following bearings. Tube one…”

On the flanks of Sor-Jan, the shivering raid commander saw the execute
code flash on the display screen of his digital radio. Immediately he
raised the hand mic of his squadron radio and said, “All Neptune
elements, this is Neptune Six, stand by to initiate.”

Then the officer slapped the prone man next to him twice in the
buttocks. The other SEAL, who was peering through the optics of his
Javelin launcher at the radar van three hundred yards away, depressed
his thumb triggers, and the raid was on.

The Javelin jumped upwards out of its tube on the force of the
compressed air from its “soft launch” system. A split second later, the
rocket motor ignited, and the missile streaked upwards, arcing the short
three hundred yards to the radar. The weapon dove towards the van and
exploded in the flash that lit up the surrounding snowscape. Hot metal
ripped into the van and blew apart the flimsy radar antenna. All over
the island, the other SEALs took the explosion as the signal to open
fire. Rifle and machinegun rounds ripped into tents, SA-3 vehicles,
anti-aircraft guns, and aircraft.

Twenty miles to the south, sixteen missiles skimmed above the waves,
heading north. Oklahoma City’s crew had launched the four Harpoons from
the sub’s torpedo tubes at the same time the twelve Tomahawks burst
vertically out of its VLS cells. Now all of the weapons converged on the
southern broadside of Jan Mayen. Three Harpoons followed a course
towards the tanker at the pier, while the fourth streaked towards the
anchored Pauk.

The crew of the Pauk had been mostly huddled in their crew quarters
against the miserable cold when the attack began. They were ill-prepared
for the onslaught of American missiles. What saved the ship was quick
action by the junior officer on watch. As soon as the sound of gunfire
had erupted from the shore, the officer had ordered his skeleton watch
crew to activate the corvette’s single AK-630 CIWS. The automated
weapons warmed up just in the nick of time. Its short-range radar
detected the incoming threat, and the 30mm gun rotated in that
direction. In less than a second a stream of shells was spitting towards
the Harpoon. One of the big rounds connected, and the missile detonated
over the water in a yellow burst that reflected briefly off the flock of
surviving missiles skimming above the anchorage.

Fourth Post

The remaining fifteen American missiles streaked past the Pauk to the
left and right, barely out of range of the corvette’s AK-630. The first
weapons to reach their targets were the Harpoons targeted at the tanker
at the end of the pier. The first one slammed into the vessel, tearing a
deceptively neat hole into the tanker’s starboard flank just before the
warhead exploded, igniting fuel and fumes. The remaining two Harpoons
bored in and added their warheads to the conflagration that was quickly
consuming the vessel, its crew, the pier, and the pipeline that led
onshore towards the airfield.

The SEALs on the ridgeline above the runway possessed a front row seat
to the fireworks that engulfed the makeshift Soviet airfield as the
twelve Tomahawks arrived in quick succession. The first things to burn
were the four MiG-23s parked near the runway. Their pilots had been on
the first leg of their flight to Iceland and stopped over here for the
night. Now they would never get there.

Next went the fuel blivets. The entire island seemed to be bathed in
yellow light from burning fuel, made even brighter by the fire’s
reflection of the white snow and grey clouds. One missile blew apart the
old Norwegian airstrip shack that doubled as the strip’s control tower.
Two flew to the end to the runway and released submunitions over the
construction site, wrecking vehicles and igniting yet more fuel. The
last few Tomahawks spent themselves diving into the temporary weather
shelters erected by the Soviet ground crew on the north side of the
runway, where the missiles’ warheads wreaked havoc on maintenance
equipment and aircraft maintainers who, just moments before, had been
asleep in their workspaces.

Even before the reverberations of the last missile warhead stopped
resounding off the island’s two mountains, two SEAL assault teams were
up and trotting forward, weapons ready. One made for the two rows of
tents north of the airfield, where confused Russians were just now
beginning to brave the bitter cold, stepping out to see the destruction
that was engulfing their airfield. The second team spread out into an
arrowhead formation and moved down towards the runway.

The SEALs of the assault team making for the tents started squeezing off
rounds from their weapons as they moved forward in a tactical
half-crouch, dropping several of the Russians who had ventured out to
see what was happening. The others disappeared into back behind the
flaps, shouting a warning. More than one reemerged with an AK, only to
be dropped by well-aimed shots from the SEALs as the commandos drew
closer. Then the SEALs were in among the tents. The team split up, with
one section covering the entrances while another ran up the aisle
between the two rows of shelters, tossing satchel charges through the
entrances that exploded amid shrieks and cries from those inside. The
assault team continued through the tents towards the east end of the
airstrip.

The second team swept across the runway, placing satchel charges against
the remaining weather shelters and blowing them down, shooting any
Russians who tried to exit the temporary structures. Half the team
turned west and destroyed the remaining vehicles that looked even
remotely serviceable at the construction site. It was all over in just a
few minutes. As the SEALs began to withdraw up the ridge they left
behind them a scene of utter destruction: broken airplanes, smashed
buildings, smoldering tents, bodies scattered about, all lit by the
yellow light of burning fuel from the blivets and the tanker that was
settling to the bottom of the icy surf zone.

But the night was not done yet. As the SEALs crested the ridgeline, they
ran directly into a patrol of Soviet paratroopers who had been out
scouting the northeast end of the island and who had hurried back when
they hear gunfire and explosions. A confused firefight erupted between
the intermixed Americans and Russians. Two SEALs dropped before the ten
Soviets died in a hail of automatic fire. One of the Americans was dead,
the other would need to be carried to the extraction point. None of the
Soviet soldiers survived.

The American commandos, their victory somewhat tempered by their losses,
shouldered their wounded comrade and the body of their dead and
disappeared into the night on the north side of the island. The recon
teams and the radar assault team also withdrew. All converged on the
same black sand beach where they had disembarked less than four hours
earlier. The Zodiacs were waiting.

The wounded man went in the boat first. His recovery onto *Batfish*
would be tricky. The SEAL commander was in contact with the boat’s
skipper about the problem, and they agreed that the submarine would need
to surface to get the wounded man aboard. This was done without
incident, and the Zodiacs returned to the beach for their next load.
Three more trips and the island was clear.

*Batfish* slipped into the depths, heading south. She left behind her a
smoking ruin on Jan Mayen. It would be days before the Soviets would be
able to use the field there to reinforce Iceland. The stage was set for
the Navy and Air Force to set the conditions to retake what the Soviets
had stolen.
