**<u>Northern Fury \#13 – Cutting the Tether</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, Sept 2021</u>**

This isn’t a typical Northern Fury scenario. For one thing, it is quite
small and the complexity rating given must be taken with a pinch of
salt. Secondly, there is at least a 50% focus on land operations. You
can only play the NATO side.  
  
NATO has decided to commence its counter-attack on Iceland with a
special forces raid to disrupt the Soviet refuelling base on Jan Mayen
Island. Two SSNs, Batfish and Oklahoma City, are assigned to the task.
Batfish is equipped with a special hold to store RHIBs, which can insert
SEALs on enemy coastlines. Her job is to land and later evacuate three
strike and two recon teams of commandoes. These will then attack the
Soviet facilities on the island and mark them for Oklahoma to hit from a
distance with Tom Cruise missiles.  
  
There is known to be a MiG-23 fighter squadron at Jan Mayensfield, along
with Be-12 Mail flying boats, the latter being grounded by dense fog on
the night of the raid. These are supported by AvGas stores and a
pipeline to the island’s pier, where a tanker is currently offloading
more fuel. Recon has also detected a large construction site and tented
camp. All of this is warded by a battery of Goa SAMs, some ZSU-23 mobile
AA vehicles, a Box Spring air search radar and several platoons of
Soviet paras. In addition to the tanker, there is a Pauk-class patrol
craft offshore, which poses only limited danger to the SSNs, but could
shell the SEALs. By no means all of the targets have been precisely
located, so the SEAL recon teams have an important job to plug this
gap.  
  
Speed is of the essence, as the raiding force has to be embarked and
away by daybreak in about eight hours’ time. Matters are not greatly
helped by tide and beach conditions, which necessitate landing the SEALs
at the SW end of the elongated island, with several kilometres of rough
terrain between them and the objectives. At least this area is but
lightly patrolled.  
  
While Oklahoma City kept her distance, Batfish launched the RHIBs (which
ARE already loaded with the SEALs), then covered them against
intervention by the Pauk, confident that her torpedoes comfortably
outranged the patrol boat’s ASW weapons. As it happened, the RHIBs,
moving at Full, reached the marked Beach Area without incident and
smoothly transferred the commandoes ashore. Note that only Strike Team A
lands to begin with and the rest arrive according to a pre-set schedule
over the following hour or so. It takes just over an hour from the start
of the game to get everyone onto the beach. The RHIBs can then be RTB’d
back to Batfish, as there’s an Evacuation Zone which ‘teleports’ the
SEALs to safety one they cross to the N of the two markers.  
  
I quickly found that the terrain is a serious problem. Steering the
optimum path requires more knowledge of the land movement rules than I
possess and I had to zoom-in and guess as best I could. Even at ‘Flank’,
speed varied from 1-4 knots. I opted to follow the NW shoreline, as this
avoided having to cross the rugged ridgeline.  
  
Batfish’s sensors had detected the Box Spring on a height atop said
ridge, a little way SW of the airfield complex, so I steered Team A,
assigned to take it out, in that direction. The SEALs spotted a unit of
Soviet paras SE of the installation, so I approached from the opposite
side, destroyed the radar easily with small-arms fire and withdrew. It
scored no points. There was then the issue of whether to send Team A to
help the other squads or not, but I was concerned about losing points
for missing the evacuation deadline and decided to have them loiter and
cover their comrades’ later retreat.  
  
Recon Team E, charged with checking-out the airfield, found a good
vantage point at about 1,700’ and harvested the required intel, staying
put in that location.  
Despite destroying the Box Spring, I saw no reason why the Goa couldn’t
still engage my TLAMs, so I sent Recon Team D, which had accomplished
their mission of scouting the harbour facilities, to deal with it.  
  
The Pauk was a little way out to sea, SE of the base, so I got rid of
her with a Harpoon from Oklahoma City. It removed a problem, but scored
no points. Needed to do this manually for Doctrine reasons.  
  
Two Russian patrols moved to intercept the incoming SEALs SW of the
airfield. Team B was assigned to ‘destroy any local base defence’, so I
judged that this qualified. They attacked and eliminated the first enemy
platoon, but took a point of damage in response. None of this scored any
points.  
  
Meanwhile, Oklahoma City switched fire to the tanker, striking her with
her remaining three Harpoons. This left the ship in a sinking condition
and she went down not long afterwards for 10VP, blocking the harbour as
planned. I had Batfish’s torpedoes as a back-up option, anyway.  
Team D then took down the Goa site with small arms, again scoring no
points. It may be that this was unnecessary, but I wasn’t taking any
chances. Unfortunately, the second Soviet para unit then latched onto
Team D and the AI’s better understanding of the terrain rules allowed
them to catch us. The SEALs turned at bay and did some serious damage to
their attackers, but were outnumbered and wiped-out, which cost 20VP.  
  
Sweeping the harbour, Batfish torpedoed and sank a Magadan-class
icebreaker, simply because it was there, but scored no points for it.  
  
Oklahoma City now felt clear to let fly with her TLAMs and proceeded to
wreak considerable havoc. I aimed at specific targets, prioritising the
fuel infrastructure and parked MiGs and Mails, but found that the cruise
missiles could blast nearby items as well. In all, the SSN demolished 3
Mails, 13 MiG-23s (1 VP per plane), an ammo pad (nil), all 5 AvGas
stores and the pipeline (5 VP each), the camp (1 point each for 11
tents), the vehicle park/construction site (10 VP) and a small building,
presumably an admin block (2 VP). Batfish was too close to use her TLAM
IIs (minimum range 40nm), but fired her two TLAM IIIs (minimum 5nm) at
the remaining aircraft shelters without any real effect.  
  
Meanwhile, the SEALs headed for the Evacuation Zone at best speed, there
being little point in risking them further. As it happened, I got a
message saying that it was time to evacuate at 01:20 local time and the
scenario ended with a score of +59 and a Minor Victory. I played on
anyway and got all of the surviving teams out before the original time
limit, which scored another 6 VP (for some reason, there are no points
for extracting Team C), but this made little difference. Under the
circumstances, I was content to take a Minor Victory and the raid had
largely accomplished its objectives. What impact this would have going
forward remained to be seen.  
  
Next time, Eisenhower and Carl Vinson take-on the air defences at
Keflavik. I am not looking forward to this.
