**Mediterranean Fury 5: Serbia-right!**

16 Feb 1994, 1300 Zulu, 1400 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf5\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.32917in" alt="UNPROFOR checkpoint in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Stari Vitez, 1 May 1994) - CVCE Website" />

Three days into World War Three and you as **Commander 5<sup>th</sup>
Allied Tactical Air Force (ATAF)** are now focusing your efforts on the
Adriatic and Balkan situation. Commander 6<sup>th</sup> Fleet as
Commander NATO Strike Force Southern Europe (STRIKFORSOUTH) has been
given the task of cleansing the Mediterranean Sea of Soviet threats and
neutralizing Libya and Syria. Commander Allied Land Forces South-Eastern
Europe (LANDSOUTHEAST) is working the situation in the Bosporus and
Aegean Sea. All three of these commands have been allocated land, sea
and air forces and have effectively become regional Joint Commands, at
least until the situation stabilizes.

The situation in the Balkans is complex; Slovenia is working hard at
becoming a NATO member but has no military force to speak off, Croatia
and Bosnia are being stabilized by
[UNPROFOR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Nations_Protection_Force)
(United Nations Protection Force), Serbia is being actively recruited by
the Soviets but the provinces of Macedonia and Kosovo are on the verge
of open revolt despite Belgrade’s oppression, and Albania is striving to
be neutral but is riddled with organized crime. UNPROFOR is a large
force but dispersed across the two countries and set up for
stabilization, not warfighting, also several of the 40-odd countries
making up its force of over 30,000 troops want no part in this war – and
many others want their troops back. NATO’s Operation [Deny
Flight](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Deny_Flight) and [Sharp
Guard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Sharp_Guard), the air and
sea blockade of the Balkans, are still in place but their
responsibilities and resources have fallen under your control.

For the past 72 hours your Area of Operation (AO) has been quiet –
disturbingly quiet! The WP has not violated UNPROFOR airspace while the
tempest of war goes on to the north, south and east, apparently content
to hold down NATO forces while conserving their own. NATO on the other
hand is not anxious to engage on another front at a disadvantage, and
has been content to hold back and wait, its pulled back its Operation
DENY FLIGHT forces to hold over the Adriatic in a desire not to provoke
a reaction, while naval forces maintain anti-smuggling patrols. A phony
war akin to the winter of 1939/1940 in France has developed. Although
this may sound like a good thing – you’ve watched as forces flowed
through and around your command without any real reinforcement being
assigned to you – from your perspective that is not ideal. There are
also some indications that the Soviets don’t trust their fraternal
brothers in Romania and Hungary to do any heavy lifting.

That situation however is about to change. Just over 20 hours ago the
small container ship ***MV Hansa Carrier*** enroute to Split experienced
an explosion reported as a possible mine incident in Splitska Vrata
Channel. She was carrying sundry goods for Croatian consumption but also
many containers specifically to supply UNPROFOR forces.

So, SHAPE (Supreme HQ Allied Powers Europe) has directed Naples (AFSOUTH
– Allied Forces Southern Europe) to conduct strikes into Hungary
primarily to distract WP efforts in Germany; but also to exert pressure
to deter WP operations in Syria and the Bosporus area and finally, to
cover SNMCMG2’s (Standing NATO Mine Countermeasures Group 2) operation
to rescue the ***Hansa Carrier.***

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf5\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.34792in" alt="Aerial port side view of the Italian Sparviero class hydrofoil-missile NIBBIO P-421) and FALCONE (P-422) underway - U.S. National Archives &amp;amp; DVIDS Public Domain Search" />

**<u>Mediterranean Fury \#5</u>** places the player at the horns of a
dilemma. Should the allied air forces proceed as directed and conduct
strikes into Hungary, or should they prepare for a WP air and ground
assault which the intelligence staff is warning against?

The end result is a complex and diverse scenario running the width of
the Balkans and the breadth of the Aegean. Counter smuggling operations,
rescue of UNPRFOR personnel, defending far flung locations and striking
deep into WP territory are all part of the game.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf5\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:7.98542in" alt="List of Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21 operators - Wikipedia" />
