**Northern Fury 45, Rock on the Beach**

2 April 94 0300 Zulu, 0400 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf45\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" alt="USMC looks to augment amphibious ops with unmanned systems -- Defense Systems" />

Six weeks into World War Three and the Warsaw Pact has been halted on
all fronts, now NATO is striking back. Overnight 31 March/1 April
STRIKEFLTLANT conducted amphibious and airborne operations to sever the
Soviet land and sea line of communications (LOC) in Norway. As
anticipated the Soviets reacted strongly and you, as commander of the
6th Marines Regimental Landing Team (RLT), acting as the floating
reserve have been committed to stabilize a difficult situation.

As part of **OPERATION ODIN’S THRUST** your Regiment, veterans of the
ferocious fighting on Iceland last month, were held back a reserve. Your
sister RLTs, 2nd Marines who have spent the war afloat, and 25th
Marines, a reserve formation just arrived in theater, went ashore two
days ago and have run into some trouble.

The British Royal Marines, and airborne units to the north have had a
tough time but are holding firm, Soviet forces are mounting on the
eastern flank however. To the south, two brigades of the 82nd Airborne
Division landed successfully but are under heavy pressure from the
south.

Your task in this scenario will be to seize and hold the area north of
Narvik, in preparation for another brigade of the 82nd Airborne to jump
in and seize the town itself \[not in scenario\].

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf45\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" alt="A picture containing outdoor, grass, pile, military vehicle Description automatically generated" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#45</u>** is a scenario set in a very complex
environment, the Soviets are split in two on an operational level, with
an Army to the east and north and several large formations trapped to
the south. Additionally, there are forces trapped in the middle between
the Brits, the other Marine Regiments and the 82<sup>nd</sup> Airborne –
these are the ones you are fighting. These trapped elements are well
positioned, well equipped and show no sign of giving up, which makes
them quite dangerous.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf45\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.34167in" alt="9K32 Strela-2 | Weaponsystems.net" />
