**Northern Fury â€“ The Longest Battle**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Nov 2016</u>**

Wow, this one's a monster! I've been staring at it for three evenings
now, plotting and planning, and I still haven't had the courage to hit
play.

I suddenly have a much higher sympathy for the guys who had to plan and
execute convoys in real life. Reign in all those dispersed merchants to
form convoys, or try to dash them for port? Multiple convoy routes, or a
few sanitized lanes? Send a stream of small convoys, or lose the time to
form a couple of monsters and pile all my defence onto them? Every sound
defensive measure cuts into travel time. It's soo tempting to send the
fast container ships together in fast convoys, but then I double the
number of targets, cut the defences for each in half, and make it much
more difficult for the escorts to hear anything. But the guys in Europe
are desperate for supplies! Aaarrggghhh!

Nearly ready to go here too, after \~ 4 to 5 evenings of looking at it.

THE PLAN (such as it is...)

Generally similar to magi's layout. Convoys will be restricted to
specific paths. I will not try to sweep the entire path at once, but
will concentrate on an area preceding each convoy.

On North America's east coast, convoys will follow the coast north,
meeting up and growing at each major port until I have two main convoys
underway, one fast, and one slow. These will be proceeding in deep
water, just off the continental shelf, to take away any bottom-hugging
advantage the subs could get, and to allow me to use convergence zones
to my advantage. Once the convoys are off the southern heel of the Grand
Banks they will split and either head on a single path for Europe, or
the Med. Westbound convoys from Europe will follow these paths in
reverse. The Kennedy will be going this way, along with most of the
coastal frigates and destroyers. Hopefully Kennedy's planes can deal
with any Bears that come snooping down from the Iceland direction.

Texan convoys will follow a similar route once they round Florida, but
there's the Cuban problem to deal with first. I suspect we'll have subs
in the Florida Straits, but I can't patrol them with MPA as long as the
Cuban air-force is flying. Therefore, I'll be making heavy fighter
sweeps at the beginning, to try and knock out as many of their planes as
possible, and I'll park TG Dale off Havana where its long-range SAMs can
interfere the moment Cuban planes lift off.

The Panama convoys will head out the Mona Straits between the Dominican
and Puerto Rico, and straight-line across the ocean to the Med, with
Europe-bound ships heading north to the Bay of Biscay as they approach
the coast. Warships at Panama will proceed as escort, with the exception
of the Tatnall, which will stay behind to patrol the mouth of the Canal
and provide SAM cover. (I'm not willing to leave the Canal Zone
completely undefended at this point.) My policy towards neighbouring
foes will be to monitor but avoid combat if possible.

Off Brazil the Asturias group has been ordered to turn south and meet up
with the Rio convoys, before taking them in the direction of Europe via
Cape Verde. The convoys heading from Rio to the US are on their own... I
wouldn't want to be on those ships. Further south the Falklands forces
turtle in and patrol, hoping the Argentines will be quiet for the
moment. Across the ocean TG Stump will turn south and try and round up
the scattered merchants and make a convoy before heading north again.
Some of the more northerly merchants will put in at St Helena and
Ascension to wait for the convoy to catch up. My main concern here is
the potential for Bears to be operating out of Nigeria, where I have no
air cover at all. Again, the life expectancy of these scattered
merchants is probably poor.

The main other operation at the start will be a surge of recce (i.e.
maritime surveillance) and ELINT aircraft, to try and pin down what sort
of merchant (or pseudo-merchant) traffic is out there, and limit the
effect of any nasty Soviet-shaped surprises that may be lurking in
innocent fishing boats. (Looking at you, invasion of Iceland.)

The thing that worries me the most is that these routes and precautions
will take too much time, and that I should simply be straight-lining
across the ocean. We'll have to see. I'm also concerned that as new
merchants trickle in I won't have a good way to cover them, and they'll
either have to go it alone, or wait far too long for an escort to
arrive.

Fingers crossed!

Well, after a couple of days of play I'm about half a day in.

Fighter sweeps against Cuba went well, and I think I've dealt with the
remains of the Cuban air force, the three SAM sites intel reported, as
well as all their surface ships that I could find. (A number of
Boghammer clones and a pair of Osas.) Guantanamo had a visit from an odd
little high speed intruder, but that was spotted at a distance by my
drone, and dealt with afterwards. The drone continues to patrol around,
and found an artillery battery, but so far nothing else.

I've been trying to avoid the lesser combatants, but in some cases that
hasn't worked. Nicaragua sent out some Mig-21s towards one of my
helicopters on maritime patrol, and they opened fire at some of my F-16s
that came to warn them off, so I shot them down shortly afterwards.
Honduras also sent a flight of F-5s in towards my Panama convoy, so
those were shot down too. The Venezuelans and I are keeping an eye on
each other. Some of their small Constitucions have gotten a look at my
convoy (and probably called in the Hondurans), but so far we're not
shooting at each other, and I'm content to keep it that way. There's
certainly enough of them to cause a real problem. Down south Argentina
and I have been shadowing each other as their recce planes make circuits
around the island, but they have no radar and they're above the clouds,
so I'm content to let them do that. I've got a Nimrod in the air now,
and I should have a reasonable look at their navy soon if it's at sea. I
fear I'll get shot down if I'm too close to the coast, so I'll have to
be careful.

The submarine war was going well - at first. Helicopters ID-ed and
eliminated an SS in the channel between the Dominican and Puerto Rico,
and the Trepang snuck up behind a Kilo in the Florida Straits and
torpedoed it in the baffles. Things going well! This should be easy!
Then my convoy of beautiful high speed military transports runs right
over a goddamned Tango before they can meet up with their escorts, and
suddenly I've got multiple inbound torpedoes. Three of my ships collect
a torpedo each, one of them gets hit by two, and only one manages to
dodge them all. Thank god none of them sink. The French deal with the
Tango, but my hopes of multiple high speed runs with these valuable
ships are dashed. The one with two hits is heading back to Brest for
repairs with the big coast guard cutter as escort, and the others are
pressing on with the crossing, tucked into the middle of Convoy 94/01
for their protection. They can still steam faster than most merchants,
but when they reach North America I'll have to take them out of service
for repairs.

The biggest casualty here is my plan for high-speed convoys with the
civilian container ships. Although they can cruise at 20+ knots, I can't
escort effectively at that speed, and it would be so easy to blunder
into another sub and lose a convoy. So we're forming up into big slow
convoys and churning along like a wallowing tanker, dammit. The boys in
Europe will have to wait a bit longer. As it happens, the new policy is
soon vindicated when my big Panama convoy detects a Victor closing in
(probably directed by those 'non-combatant' Venezuelans), and deals with
it by helicopter. Another Victor (this time a Victor III) gives me a
scare when it gets dangerously close to one of my fancy SURTASS ships. I
had assumed these ships were so good they could detect anything inside
the nearest CZ. Not so... A lucky MAD contact saves me from disaster
there.

Other than that my maritime surveillance patrols have found one big
Russian support ship tucked into a bay on the African coast, resting at
anchor. I consider sending a pair of frigates down from Gibraltar to
deal with it, but that would take days, so I send a P-3 instead. A 4
Harpoon night-time BOL salvo, timed for a very close range activation,
takes it by surprise. FLIR shows that multiple hits are achieved, but
the burning ship is still afloat. I'm not sure what it was doing there.
Sub tender, perhaps? I'll have to restrike.

So far a very interesting game, but with my arthritic computer the best
I'm achieving is \~ 1.75 times speed (pulse times often in the 500 to
800 ms range). And that means for a 1 month scenario played a few hours
a night I could expect this to take three months or more to complete.
I'll keep going for one crossing, I think, but unfortunately it may not
be practical to complete the entire scenario.

The game continues. It's now Feb 25, and convoys continue to form up and
head out into the ocean. The badly wounded T-AKR is nearly back to
Portsmouth for repair, and the others are continuing west with convoy
94/01. My main convoys haven't had any direct sub contacts yet, for
which I'm grateful. A couple of SSKs were found in the Americas when
their courses took them into water that was so shallow they had to put
their masts above water, allowing them to be detected on radar. The
Asturias carrier group took care of another sub off the Brazilian coast,
and P-3s got lucky in mid-ocean as they were prepping a convoy route.
Total kills of Warsaw Pact subs are now at 6 SSKs (plus 1 Cuban SSK) and
4 SSNs, all of them Victor I or IIIs. No sign of the truly modern subs
yet, nor of any SSGNs, which could be a big problem if (when) they show
up. Hopefully they're all busy up north fighting the carrier groups
around Iceland.

In the Caribbean I'm nervous that the Cubans will bring a few airplanes
out of maintenance depots or dispersed sites, so I've been bombing their
runways to crater them and try to prevent any unpleasant surprises in
that respect. Honduras and Nicaragua have been quiet since their
aircraft probes on Day 1, so I'm leaving them alone. (Crap. Spoke to
soon. Goblin directly in front of my Panama convoys! But fortunately
just Tuna.) Venezuela is watching, but so far no hostile action, despite
some close passes with some of the Constitucion class patrol boats. I am
worried about the one patrolling between the Dominican and Puerto Rico,
which will probably sail right through my Panama convoys, which should
be interesting.

Things are also interesting down in the Falklands. My MPAs have spotted
three Mekos patrolling off the Argentine coast, which is to be expected,
along with regular visits from the LearJets. A bit more of a surprise
was the warship about 500 miles to the ENE of the Falklands. I had not
expected them to be so far out. This has prompted Nimrod searches in the
area, and an overflight of South Georgia, but so far nothing else has
shown up there. Much more alarming was the sub that stuck up its
periscope within spitting distance of the Port Stanley docks!
Fortunately the Jupiter was nearby, and I was able to rush in an ASW
helicopter. This was well within my territorial waters and much too
dangerous to let go, so I sank it. So far no response from the
Argentines. Fingers crossed... I'm very concerned that this was a
special forces insertion, preparatory to a landing, so I've been sending
FLIR equipped helicopters to scour the area (and other likely
positions), but so far no sign of anything. Unfortunately the odds of
actually spotting a special forces team is remote.

Sad news for the crew of the P-3 that was visiting the Nigerian coast.
Despite staying well out to sea they had a visit from a Mig-25, and were
subsequently shot down, but they did have time to report a couple of
ships in the area. I think I'll have to keep some fighters and MPA in
Ascension in case of aggressive action from that direction. (I'm still
betting on a Bear to cue an SSG or SSGN.)

New merchants keep reporting in, and so far I've been dashing them to
catch up with the tail of recently departed convoys, but soon I'll have
to start gathering for new convoys. Sloooow!

Hoo boy, the waters are hot around the Azores...

The first missiles turned on their radars right between the two frigates
screening the front of a 37 merchant convoy out of Gibraltar, prompting
my ships to light up too. Those missiles missed (presumably fired at
coarse CZ contacts), and I was able to shoot down the next few while
everything that flew converged on the area and finally managed to pin
down the Oscar some 35 miles out. Brown pants all round, but the Oscar
was shooting based on poor targeting, and only got off about half its
missiles, so no losses. Celebration!

The second Oscar a few minutes later was further out. It got off almost
all its missiles before my frantic helicopters could close in and sink
it. SAMs went flying everywhere, some missiles were shot down, some
overflew or missed due to coarse targeting, but then I mostly ran out of
SAMs. Those box launchers for Sea Sparrow and SeaWolf just don't have
the capacity to handle a major engagement like this. One merchant and on
British warship went down, frantically trying to reload. Losing ships is
never good, but trading two lesser ships for two Soviet capital ships
like Oscars is probably marginally in my favour.

I never saw the third Oscar. It launched everything. A radical convoy
course change saved me from some of the missiles, but the remainder
struck home and two more merchants and another three frigates went down,
firing off their last few SAMs as they went. Now I've got to get 34
merchants across 3/4 of the ocean with 3 exhausted frigates for escorts.
If there's another Oscar out there these guys are toast.

Tense times... What a difference an Aegis ship could have made...

March 1 1994, 20:00 Zulu.

First merchant unloads! "War good as won" says Secretary of the Navy.
"Mission accomplished" proclaims president. "One lone ship from Halifax
to New York without any losses. A magnificent demonstration of naval
power."

So maybe it's not quite that significant, but a good excuse for a sitrep
nonetheless.

The fight against the Russians continues. After the Oscar attack I tried
putting an ASW aircraft cordon between the probable location of the
third Oscar and the African coast, in case it was headed for the
location of the sunken sub tender, but nothing turned up. The damned
thing could be anywhere. Hopefully they don't have any missiles tucked
away in an African port somewhere. At the moment my forces are claiming
6 lesser SS (including that ugly Romeo conversion), 8 moderns SS
(various Kilos, including the Cuban one), 7 SSN (including an ancient
Hotel), and 3 SSGN (the third being a Charlie up north). Rather
alarmingly, intel is also muttering about the Russians losing a Badger
in theatre, although they won't tell me where. (It showed up
unexpectedly on the losses chart.)

Westbound convoys in the north are closing in on the Grand Banks,
passing the Eastbound convoys in the same area. A new convoy is leaving
the Brest area, with 14 freighters and the repaired T-AKR (freshly
patched in Portsmouth), mostly escorted by second-rate ships coming on
station in the last few days. The convoy which tangled with the Oscars
near the Azores continues on, gradually dropping a trail of damaged
stragglers behind it. (I've got a tug coming out of Europe to bring home
one mangled tanker with no engines left.) Near Bermuda I've got escorts
dropping in to top off their tanks before heading back to their
eastbound convoy. My Panama to Med convoy is getting a bit nervous as it
watches some if its escorts heading back to the mainland for lack of
fuel. Hopefully nothing too dangerous lurks in its path. The Asturias is
bringing its eastward bound convoys across the equator now, but the
westbound ones have branched off and are heading up the coast of South
America (albeit \~ 250 miles out) without escort. Nobody's available to
escort them, poor fellows. TG Stump, way down south, is in a bad way for
fuel, and is hoping the oiler coming up from South Africa can save the
situation. (I copied the A 14 from the Asturias group in order to
replace the Unrep-less South African oiler.)

The situation with the lesser combatants is relatively calm. Cuba,
Honduras, and Nicaragua are all quiet at the moment. I'm keeping an eye
on Venezuela from a distance. There is one sonar-less patrol boat which
was in the strait my Panama convoy needed was sunk in the dead of night
by a discrete Mk48. A set of three missile boats which were on a flank
speed course for my convoy were engaged at dawn by A-4s coming out of
the western darkness and sunk before they could ID their attackers.
Without firm intelligence on what happened, the Venezuelans have not
launched further attacks, although I did have to pull my E-8 further
north in response to their fighter sweeps. Down south the Argentines and
I continue to patrol and keep an eye on each other. More Tornados have
flown in, and the Perry is on station, but no hostilities so far. I
haven't sent everything down to the Falklands, and I'm retaining some
units at Ascension in case of Nigerian troubles.

Lessons Learned

Fuel is Important! Those Perrys have short legs. At this scale oilers
and bases become so much more important. (Suddenly the lumbering old
Protecteur is one of my most valuable /assets.) This is especially true
at the inefficient convoy speeds I need to travel at in order to get any
decent sonar performance, and to stay with slow-moving tankers. A Perry
can go 4200 nm on a single tank of gas - at it's fuel efficient cruise
speed of 20 kts. Of course it can't hear as much at that speed, and it
would leave its convoy far behind. If I'm travelling at 12 kts, like a
cruising tanker, my range is only 2700 nm. That's a single crossing in a
narrow spot.

Sprint and Drift eats fuel! You're essentially trying to cross the
Atlantic at fuel-inefficient low speed, and fuel-inefficient high speed.
You probably won't get there. It may work nicely for a couple of days in
a restricted zone, but not so much on the grand scale of this scenario
(unless you have enough oilers).

Not all oilers carry all fuels! Gas Fuel is not Oil Fuel is not Diesel
Fuel!!

I, naturally, have cleverly made sure my task groups need all three
types of fuel at once, while only half my oilers can provide it, and two
thirds of those are down in the southern hemisphere. Now I really
respect the Protecteur!

March 4 1994, 23:00 Z

Time for another progress report!

All P-3 squadrons are now deployed and operational, many of them out in
the islands. (I've been using those 747s on cargo missions to simulate
bringing in torpedoes and supplies for them.) Because I have so many MPA
operating in so many different areas, I had to take a moment to
re-organize. Instead of having task-based missions I now have
Squadron-based missions. Each squadron is assigned one zone, and these
zones are applied to different routes or areas of interest as needed,
sometimes stacking multiple zones if I need a concentrated effort. I had
to make myself a squadron map to keep organized, and I think it's
helping.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nf34_aj\media\image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:3.58611in" />

Several of my big westbound convoys are headed south along the American
continental shelf, and should reach their ports in a day or two. My two
big eastbound convoys are about 1000 nm out from Europe and should be
arriving sometime on the 8th. The convoys from Texas and Panama will
take several days more, and the Brazilian and African convoys will take
even longer. (The African convoy is currently anchored at St. Helena,
waiting for stragglers to catch up. I suspect I'll only get one trip out
of these guys.)

Fuelling continues to be an issue. I'm learning to really admire diesel
powered ships, with their tremendous range. Its funny how in most
scenarios I really admire ships with great weapons fits, or powerful
sensor arrays, but in this game, I'm ogling the size of the fuel tanks.
A mighty ship isn't much use if it can't get there.

The lesser combatants remain quiet for the moment. Another Argentine sub
made a close appearance, within a mile of the Falklands shore, so I
broke contact with my ship, carefully tracked it with helicopters, and
then sank it with MPA when I was confident they wouldn't know who fired
the shot. No response from the Argentines so far, so I think it worked.
I'm aware of another of their subs off in deep water, but I'm letting it
be because it's not in my territorial waters.

A few more Russian subs have fallen victim to my aircraft. The score now
includes an extra Tango, three more Kilos, four more SSN (all Victors of
various types - only one truly modern SSN seen so far), and an SSG.

The SSG was an interesting one. The Asturias carrier was approaching
Cape Verde, heading NNE, and some units were hurrying ahead to refuel
when Vampires were spotted coming from the SSE. For a moment I had a
sick feeling that yet another Oscar was perfectly placed to annihilate a
convoy from behind, while all my escorts were screening out in front.
Fortunately, the contacts resolved into Shaddocks, not Shipwrecks, and
there were only four of them. The Harrier CAP was able to scramble and
deal with the medium altitude slightly supersonic missiles, which are a
much easier target than the Oscar's brood. (It's amazing what a
difference an AWACS helicopter and some air support provide!) A look at
the radar plot showed the Shaddocks had been aimed at one of my ships
which was moving fast out in front, which seemed odd since the missiles
came from the rear quarter. Fortunately, I clued in in time to realize
something else out there had to be doing the spotting, and I cut the
throttle so I was able to hear the torpedo launch before I ran over the
Tango. Running away at flank speed gave my helicopters time to sink the
Russian sub, but if it hadn't been for the warning shot from Juliett I
would have stumbled right onto the Tango and lost another escort. (The
Juliett was eventually found and dealt with by my Sea Kings.)

Lessons Learned (sorta)

Convoy, convoy, convoy! I'm always tempted to send just one more
late-appearing merchant ship running after the convoy to try and catch
up. Don't do it! That's when a Kilo pops up and puts a pair of torps
into the helpless isolated ship, which now has to limp into the Azores
(where there's no dock big enough to fix it) while hoping there's no
other surprises in store. Or the trail of damaged stragglers from the
Oscar attack? They can make it alone, right? Nope. Not with that Victor
ready to bite off a helpless target. This one's not coming home...

But despite all these learning opportunities, I still have several
completely undefended isolated ships or mini-convoys coming up from the
southern hemisphere, where there simply aren't escorts to be had. And
I'm still trying to dash ships up and down the coast to form up or make
port. Not a good sign...

March 8 1994, 17:00 Z

The long battle continues, but after the heavy initial losses among the
Soviet submarine force it looks like things are calming down. MPA
patrols and escorts are claiming three more older SS (including another
of those Romeo conversions - I thought they had only made one?), and two
more older model Victors. The missing Oscar continues to weigh on my
mind. No sign of it anywhere. But then, just as I'm worrying about
Oscars an old Victor bites off a container ship which was trying to make
a high-speed dash for Rio, 230 miles NE of Nassau. (Remember what I said
about trying to dash up and down the coast alone? Lesson not learned.)
P-3's pounce on it, and it's dead within half an hour. So make that
three older model Victors, and a lot more letters to the families of the
deceased...

In better news, the mystery of the missing Badger report seems to have
been solved. I flew one of the EP-3s down to Ascension, and then sent it
out for a couple of night patrols with a tanker and a Tornado in
attendance, cautiously probing to see if the Mig-25s or any ships were
about. Over the course of two nights they were able to pick up the
emissions of Badgers hunting as much as 600 miles off the coast of
Nigeria. Three of them have been shot down, in addition to the one lost
before. Fortunately, my shipping in the southern hemisphere has been
routed by way of St Helena and Ascension, which are some 1400 nm out
from the coast, which would keep them safe from all but the most extreme
edge of a single missile loadout range. (Unless they've got a tanker.
Hmmm...)

Lesser nations are still keeping quiet, and even Argentina continues to
be content to monitor us without taking offensive action. I've got 5
nuclear subs down there, and I'm starting to wonder if that major force
concentration is truly needed. British subs have now localized the
patrol zones for four of their better SSKs, which seem to be patrolling
in pairs off the continental shelf in mid and northern Argentina. Their
need to snorkel gave them away.

Convoy progress is promising. My first round of major convoys has
reached port, and most are in the process of unloading now. Up to this
point 280 ships have reached their transfer zones, and another 150 or so
are two or three days out from their destinations. The torpedoed
military transports and the tankers damaged in the Oscar attack are
starting to get repaired now, and warships are refuelling in port before
forming up again (with a bit more attention to who needs what fuel this
time). The Fredericton just reported in, and a few more units are still
due to arrive, which will be helpful, although probably not critical. I
just wish they were down in the southern hemisphere, where coverage is
painfully limited.

March 11 1994, 10:30 Z

MPA squadrons report a sharp drop in enemy submarine activity in the
last few days, with only one more Victor and a couple of phantom targets
falling victim to airborne torpedoes. A number of submarine-cued hunts
up north turn out to be nothing but wildlife.

The geriatric Argonaut, one of the old Leanders retrofitted with an
extra-long tail, has an adventure when she picks up a passive sonar
contact while patrolling alone in the Bay of Biscay. Despite her
extra-long tail it's a direct path contact, and the captain slows to 2
kts to listen, thinking it's probably another biological. "SS!" says the
sonar operator, and the captain orders a flank speed turn away (thinking
to outrun a possible 533mm torpedo) while he hastily scrambles his
helicopter to investigate. The Lynx manages a 1-shot kill, amazingly
enough, and the Argonaut continues running for a few miles, before
slowing and turning aside - at which point the Type 65 torp goes
rumbling by a mile and a half off the port side! Not a Tango or a Fox,
but an equally elderly Romeo, retrofitted with deadly 650mm torps.

Down south there's little activity. The Badger hunt off the Nigerian
coast doesn't find any more targets, so the EP-3 presses in closer to
the coast with radar on, hoping to provoke a response. Sure enough a
pair of Mig-25s come out to investigate, and while the EP-3 turns away
its escorting Tornado burners around behind the Migs (staying out of
their radar), and then lights them up from behind. Both are shot down,
but their return fire gets uncomfortably close. I think I'll not repeat
that stunt. Beating up lone Badgers is one thing, but this is too risky.

Harbour master reports show a total of 287 ships unloaded or passed
through their transfer points, as of this time, with a further 68
processing at their destinations now, and an additional 40 a couple of
hours out. Major convoys have just left New York, Gibraltar, and the
Channel/Brest area, with strong escort. Lesser convoys in the southern
hemisphere and the Central America area still dream of strong escorts,
but they sure don't have them. I just know there's a disaster out there
somewhere.

(You wouldn't believe how awesome it is when a Knox checks in. Strong
active sonar, good tail, helicopter, ASROC, and a nice long range. These
are quickly becoming my favorite escorts for a no-air threat
environment. Just the thing for the smaller convoys!)
