**<u>Northern Fury \#15 â€“ Stab in the Dark</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, Nov 2021</u>**

In one of the smallest scenarios in Northern Fury, the Canadian diesel
sub, *Onondaga* has to land some Anglo-Canadian special forces on the
Snaefellsjokull Peninsula of Western Iceland. She is supported at a
distance by the SSN *Phoenix*, which is armed with TASMs for use against
enemy surface ships. The Soviets are mostly occupied elsewhere, but are
known to have at least one Grisha corvette, Romeo diesel sub and Mail
ASW plane in the area.

There is a Mission pre-set for landing the special forces, but these are
AI-controlled and matters will largely take care of themselves if you
can reach the marked zone to seaward of Hraunhals Farm.

Not being spoiled for initial options, I headed Onondaga along the
existing course towards the landing zone at Cruise, just above the layer
after taking a quick look around at periscope depth. Phoenix was ordered
to close the range a bit in support.

Nearly six hours in, Onondaga bumped into a Grisha, only detecting it
when already inside its sonar and torpedo range. Phoenix proved to have
her TASMs on magazines and, in any case, was too far away to help in
time. Perhaps I could have tried sneaking away, but I didn't fancy my
chances and chose to shoot it out. As it turned-out, I got very lucky,
sinking the corvette for 25VP and seeing its answering Enot torpedo miss
twice on 65% chances (Onondaga doesn't even have any decoys).

Just over four hours later, Onondaga reached the deployment zone,
sharply down on batteries having left the scene of the crime at speed.
This scored another 25VP. I was advised to go to 6' depth (is this
possible?) to unload the special forces. The only trouble was that there
was a Mail patrolling some 32nm to the W. Coastal shallows meant that I
was at 39' anyway. As the flying boat did not appear to have spotted me,
I decided to go to full stop and wait it out until she went off patrol.

As it happened, this was sufficient to deploy the commandoes,
regardless. I was briefed to head out to sea at 2 knots and await
confirmation that the troops were ashore. About half an hour later, this
came to pass for a further 25VP and Onondaga was at liberty to head for
an extensive escape zone to the W.

Scuttling their RHIBs, the special forces linked-up with their Icelandic
Resistance contacts, which scored 100VP and took me into Triumph
territory.

Onondaga duly reached the escape zone some eleven hours later, steering
to the N of the Mail's observed patrol zone at shallow depth while
replenishing batteries. The flying boat did, indeed, go off-station
partway through. When she returned, I took no chances and went just
above the layer. Getting away was worth another 25VP.

So, it was a Triumph, with a score of +200. The fact remains, though,
that I was VERY lucky with the Grisha and it's hard to derive much
satisfaction from winning like this. Possibly, I'd have spotted the
corvette sooner if I'd been moving at Creep, but there wasn't much else
I could have done. Nine times out of ten, I'd have been sunk and lost
the game. As I've said before, I don't like single-submarine scenarios.
