**Northern Fury 6 AAR**

**By Joel Radunzel**

**First Post:**

It's the third day of World War III and the Russian juggernaut is
churning south while the US carriers are out of position. The Russians
gained control over the air in north Norway in the first day and then
pushed south over central Norway yesterday, forcing the evacuation of
the airbases at Bardufoss, Evenes, Tromso, and Andoya. Allied air power
in Norway is now operating out of Bodo (the surviving Norwegian F-16s,
Dutch F-16s, and the 18 surviving F-15s of the US 493rd TFS). Further
south, two squadrons of US F-16s and British Jaguars have arrived at
Vaernes and Orland, respectively, to bolster the sagging defenses.

If you read my previous (Bradufoss Blues) AAR, you know I destroyed the
Soviet amphibious group that was heading south, destination unknown.
Well, this scenarios postulates that my attacks were not nearly so
effective. The Russians are still coming south, with a Kuznetsov CV far
out to sea and as yet un-located, a battle group built around the
Kiev-class carrier Baku further inland, and a surface action group close
to the Norwegian coast sweeping the way ahead of a strongly escorted
amphibious group following close behind. A second SAG was forced to turn
back yesterday after a battle with Norwegian missile boats and F-5As,
though the casualties among the missile boats was prohibitive and the
survivors are proceeding south along the coast. Intelligence indicates
that the RUssian amphibs are headed for Trondheim. If they get there,
all of central Norway way fall.

At sea, to oppose the Russian I have STANAVFORLANT, consisting of
destroyers and frigates from the US, Britain, Canada, Holland, Belgium,
France, and Germany. These are heading north to confront the Russians.
It's a powerful force, but not enough to take on the Soviets alone. Two
Norwegian frigates are closing to reinforce them. There are also missile
boats outside Trondheim, three Norwegian patrol subs, and the USS
Phoenix farther out to sea.

As the scenario starts, I have two F-16s, the last two to make it out of
Bardufoss, patrolling between Bardufoss and Bodo. The radar controllers
on the AWACS have picked up a large group of what can only be Soviet
fighters, Mig-29s and Su-27s by their radar emissions, heading south in
a sweep towards Bodo. Let the action begin...

**Second Post:**

The pilots flying the two last F-16s out of the now closed base at
Bardufoss received updates from the controllers on the AWACS circling 80
miles to the south over central Norway. A new Soviet aerial push
appeared to be developing. The day had already seen a massive offensive
by hundreds of Russian and Finnish aircraft. This one appeared to be a
bull rush of a squadron of Mig-29s, followed by another squadron of
Su-27s. F-15s were scrambling out of Bodo, but for now the pilots of the
two lone F-16s were all that stood between the Russian fighters and
central Norway. The pilots grimly turned ther aircraft north and punched
their afterburners. They had fuel to burn, operating so close to their
new base at Bodo, and the built up speed for the fight to come. The
Soviets were using the light Mig-29s to sweep ahead of the heavier, more
deadly Su-27s, and the Falcon drivers would try to mix it up with their
lighter opponents to buy time for the Eagles taking off from Bodo to
engage the Flankers.

The opposing fighters closed at a combined 1700kts. The Migs were
divided into two groups of six, and one Falcon targeted each. As they
closed, two Migs broke off from each group to engage the F-16s as the
rest tried to rocket south to get in range of the aircraft rising from
Bodo. The pilot of the westernmost F-16 began to launch his Sidewinders
just before the two Migs hunting him launched their own missiles. While
the Norwegian pilot turned into a violent evasive maneuver, the Russians
bored in. Their aggressiveness ended up being a mistake, both pilots’
last. The Sidewinders exploded meters in front of both enemy fighters,
shredding their fronts and killing both Russian pilots instantly. The
Norwegian was able to evade the missiles pursuing him and, now free of
the enemy fighters who were meant to keep him at bay, turned into the
tails of the remaining Migs who were still heading south. The NATO pilot
launched his four remaining missiles one after another at the glowing
tailpipes of the Soviet fighters. The Russians now went into wild
defensive maneuvers. Two shook they tormentors, but the other two were
shredded by shrapnel from the exploding Sidewinders.

The easternmost Norwegian pilot didn’t have nearly the success of his
wingman. One of the Russian pilots who had peeled off to engage him
managed to evade the Sidewinder sent his way, and pulled into a high G
turn to get on the F-16s tail as the NATO flier turned into the tails of
the other Migs and began launching his missiles. The Russian pilot
launched his own missile into the F-16’s tail, downing the NATO jet, but
not before another Mig fell to a Sidewinder missile. The score stood at
six Mig-29s destroyed for to one F-16, but the pilot of the Falcon was
now out of missiles and facing the wrath of the six surviving Migs as
well as the eight Sukois.

The Norwegian pilot began to hear his radar warning receiver beep as the
Su-27s’ radars reached out to target his aircraft. Keeping his
afterburner on, he banked south and ran for his life. The tone in his
headset changed as pilots of the Sukois began to launch their long-range
missiles. As he settled on a soutward bearing, he was startled to see
the contrails of missiles in front of him heading north. He was about to
jerk his aircraft into another evasive turn when he saw one of the
contrails connect with a Mig-29 and explode. The others streaked past
him, heading north. That was when he realized he had been hearing the
calm chatter of American Eagle pilots in his headset as they rose from
Bodo and began launching their AMRAAMs.

The surviving Migs had no chance. Two of the potent American missiles
were targeted at each, and all but one was sent burning to the snowscape
below. This one did not survive the second salco sent by the Americans.
The Sukois were now in a dilemma. Their own radar-guided missiles were
out-ranged by the Americans, but some had already launched against the
surviving Falcon. If the evaded, their missiles would lose the return
from their radars. If they kept coming, they were vulnerable to the
AMRAAMs. Each pilot made his own decision, some aggressively pressing
the attack and the others turning away. It didn’t matter. The swarm of
American missiles slammed into the Soviet formation, smashing six of the
eight Flankers. The other two turned north and fled. The initial Russian
play for the skies over central Norway had failed.

**Third Post:**

The captain of the Norwegian Kobben-class submarine Klinn swore as he
slapped down the handles on his periscope and pressed the button to
lower the tube housing the optic. He had been creeping west to intercept
the Soviet SAG moving down the Norwegian coast, but he had just come to
periscope depth to confirm the fear that had been growing in the pit of
his stomach; he had misjudged his intercept with the Soviet formation
and was now far in the wake of the four Soviet ships. They were
proceeding south at 18 kts, and the best his diesel sub could make was
12. Dejected, the captain walked over to the map table where his XO was
updating the positions of the other Soviet task forces based on
information that had been coming in via the communication room while he
had been scanning with the periscope. As he looked down at the plot, he
started to see another opportunity, albeit a risky one, to redeem his
mistake.

The Soviet amphibious group was following about 60 miles to the
northwest of the SAG, also moving at about 18 kts. If he could proceed
at full speed on an intercept course his boat might still be able get
into the rear of that formation and cause some mischief. The problem was
that he would have to snorkel en route to maintain his speed. The
captain judged that if he snorkeled while equidistant from both Russian
groups he stood a good chance of evading detection. Even so, he told the
radio room to risk a transmission to higher asking for air support to
try to down some of the Soviet ASW helicopters reported to be saturating
the area ahead of the amphibs. The captain then gave the order, and
Klinn dove and turned west.

Back in the skies over central Norway, yet another major Soviet aerial
push was developing behind the remnants of the disastrous first attempt.
This offensive was composed of waves of Mig-23s and Su-27s flying from
captured Norwegian fields in the north. Both sides had learned hard
lessons from the previous two days of deadly airborne duels, but the
initial Soviet wave, which was composed of a replacement regiment flying
Mig-23s, were fresh to the front and had not had the benefit of learning
from their veteran comrades. Their inexperience would prove fatal.

The ready F-15s had expended their AMRAAMs against the initial Russian
push and were returning to rearm at Bodo, but veteran Norwegian and
Dutch pilots flying nimble F-16s were rising from the field to replace
the bigger fighters. These rocketed north towards the column of Migs
sweeping south. As the opposing fighters approached each other, the
pilots began a deadly game of chicken. The NATO pilots with their lethal
IR-guided Sidewinders were out-ranged by the Russians with their radar
guided AA-7s. To compensate, the Falcon jocks flew directly at the
inexperienced Russians until the tone in their helmets told them that
they had been locked onto. Then they would bank wildly and tunr away
from the incoming missiles. Almost without fail the Russian weapons
would go wild or fall short.

After several dashes at the oncoming enemy planes the Russians were
running short of missiles. The Norwegian and Dutch fighters turned back
on their pursuers. The nimble Falcons flashed past the less maneuverable
Mig-23s, spitting Sidewinders and even Vulcan bursts into their
opponents’ craft. It was a slaughter. Two Falcons fell to Russian
missiles, but sixteen Soviet fighters marred the snowy mountains below
with black columns of oily smoke as well.

Just as the last Mig-23 spiraled out of the sky, a third F-16 exploded
unexpectedly. The second wave, this one composed of Su-27s, was
approaching on afterburner. These planes were piloted by veterans of the
previous days’ fighting, and the outmatched Falcon drivers turned south
and fled from the Russians coming on in superior numbers and superior
aircraft.

**Fourth Post:**

The Norwegian and Dutch pilots had done their part by delaying the
Russians long enough for more American pilots to get their F-15s with
their long-ranged AMRAAMs into the air. Three pairs of Eagle drivers
headed north to face a squadron of Flankers coming south. Both sides
were veterans, and both were wary of the others’ capabilities. The
Russian jets were proceeding in an electronic haze of heavy jamming
support, but NATO also had EW /assets in the air now, and pilots on both
sides found it nearly impossible to lock onto their opponents long
enough to launch a missile. Even when they managed to engage, the
missiles themselves usually lost lock and flew off into nowhere.

Neither side was willing to close into the others’ effective engagement
envelope. What developed was an inconclusive series of sallies by both
sides which were driven back by salvos of nearly blind missiles. The
Russians gained a temporary advantage with the arrival of several Mig-31
interceptors with their long-ranged AA-6 missiles, but their numbers
were two small and they pressed their attack too far, downing an F-16
but losing two of their own number to AMRAAMs in the process. Then the
fortunes of the NATO pilots took a dramatic turn for the better.

To the east, along the Swedish border, a Soviet EW Su-24 had been
working south, directing its electronic noise towards the NATO radars
and obscuring the positions of the Soviet aircraft as well as its own.
On an order from the controllers in the AWACS, five F-16s suddenly
turned and swept northeast, searching for the Russian jammer in the
gathering dusk. They nearly missed the Russian in the electronic haze,
but one of the NATO pilots spotted a glint of sunlight off of metal and
turned to find his enemy fleeing north. He triggered two AIM-9s into the
Russian’s tailpipes, and suddenly the Soviet jamming decreased markedly
in intensity.

The F-15s who had been ineffectively sparring with the Flankers up to
this point now turned and started lofting their remaining AMRAAMs at the
targets which now came clearly through on their radar screens. The
Russians had no choice but to flee or die. Many died anyway. In
addition, the decrease in jamming effectiveness revealed several pairs
of Su-24 fighter bombers attempting to infiltrate south at low altitude.
These were pounced on and destroyed Norwegians and Dutchman in their
F-16s.

Now, however, Russian numbers began to tell. The Eagle jocks were out of
missiles and the Russian pilots were turning to try to press their
advantage. No more F-15s were ready on the ground at Bodo. Another F-16
fell to an AA-10 as the NATO fliers yielded airspace. Then the Russians
turned back as well. They had detected the approaching radars of
American AMRAAM-equipped F-16 Block 50s. These were from 77th TFS and
had just arrived in Norway from England. They were speeding north to
reinforce their comrades. The Russians, content for now to control the
air above Bardufoss, withdrew again.

Fifth Post:

Aboard the Spruance-class destroyer USS Moosburger, flagship of
STANAVFORLANT, Captain Miller, commodore of the polyglot squadron, was
in a bind. He was steaming north with the eight ships under his command
and would be joined soon by two more Norwegian frigates, but his force
was badly positioned. If he continued on his northward course his ships
would be sandwiched between the strong escort of the amphibious group to
the west and the SAG moving down the coast to the east. Farther to the
west were the two Soviet carrier groups. That, and there had to be
Soviet subs lurking out there as well. His force had a strong helicopter
compliment, and birds from several different countries were searching
the sea in front of and around his flotilla for the underwater threat,
but Miller was concerned. He needed a strategy to deal with the Russian
task groups one at a time.

He had /assets. The Royal Norwegian Air Force had gathered all of its
surviving F-5As and F-5Bs, almost 40 aircraft, at Orland and the ground
crews there were readying these for a maritime strike. However, these
aircraft were only capable of strikes in daylight, and the long arctic
night was fast approaching. If the Russian amphibs maintained their
current speed, they would be almost at the entrance of the Trondheim
fjord by daybreak. The two American squadrons of F-16s that were
arriving at Vaernes east of Orland could protect his ships from aerial
attack, but they were not trained or equipped for the anti-ship mission.
His one airborne anti-ship asset were the twelve Jaguars of RAF No. 54
squadron, which, equipped with their TIALD targeting pods and
laser-guided GBU-24s, could conduct a night strike.

For now, Miller decided to turn his ships south towards Trondheim. He
transmitted the order to the other captains. The remaining missile boats
of the Norwegian Navy were concentrated around the fjord mouth, as well
as the frigate Oslo, and the two diesel subs. At the same time, Miller
sent a message to the USS Phoenix, lurking somewhere to the west, to
start a speed run eastward to get in front of the amphibious group.
However the Russians came, he wanted to meet them with a concentrated
fist rather than piecemeal.

As the NATO ships reversed course, the towed array sonar on one of the
ships picked up a submerged contact astride the formations previous
course, and the ship’s sonar operators quickly identified it as an SSN.
There were no surviving NATO subs nearby that Miller n\\knew about, so
this had to be a Russian. It was still too far away to be a threat, and
with his ships moving away at 20kts it wouldn’t become one any time
soon. For now the ASW screen coordinator concentrated the task group’s
helicopters on sanitizing the sea around STANAVFORLANT’s new course.

Just as the NATO formation was settling onto its new course, Miller
heard his chief ASW officer report excitedly, “Sir, Perseo reports
transients…two torpedoes dead ahead, range seven miles, she’s evading.
Wandelaar reports they’ve picked up an SSN on that bearing as well\!”
The American captain looked at the tactical display and saw the symbols
for three separate helicopters already converging on the new submerged
contact. Miller swore. He couldn’t afford to lose ships before even
coming to grips with the Russian surface groups.

The captains of the Italian Lupo-class frigate Perseo and the Belgian
Wielingen-class frigate Wandelaar, both in the path of the oncoming
torpedo spread, reversed course again and cranked their engines up to
flank speed in an attempt to outrun the weapons, which had apparently
been launched at nearly extreme range. Meanwhile, the rest of
STANAVFORLANT continued southward to the west of the torpedoes and
Moosburger’s helicopter was the first to arrive over the reported
position of their Russian assailant. The chopper’s crew lowered their
dipping sonar and immediately picked up the signature of a Victor III
SSN. The pilot marked the spot with smoke, then put the Seahawk’s nose
down and circles around to drop a MK54 torpedo directly into the sub’s
wake. The Russian crew barely had time to react before the torpedo
slammed into the port side of the boat, tearing a whole in the boat and
flooding the crew compartment. The sub’s captain managed to compensate
and start ascending, but a second MK54 ended any hope of survival for
the sub and its crew.

The death of the Victor robbed its torpedoes of the guidance that had
been passing down the command wires, and both weapons immediately
transitioned into S-pattern searches with their onboard active sonars.
Perseo and Wandelaar’s crews altered course to the west and managed to
escape the detection envelope of both weapons before turning back south
and jogging to catch up with the rest of the formation.

In the meantime, Miller had ordered the squadron’s helicopter screen to
close prosecute the SSN following in the formation’s wake. Three
helicopters from three different NATO nations’ ships converged on the
contact and quickly localized the position of the Sierra-class SSN
Kostrama. A pair of MK54s ended the lives of this boat’s crew as well,
and STANAVFORLANT proceeded south towards Trondheim, linking up on the
way with the two Norwegian frigates.

**Sixth Post:**

In the meantime, F-16s from 77th TFS had been pulling CAP over
STANAVFORLANT. The Soviets had been maintaining their own CAP of Su-33s
far out to the west ahead of the Kuznetsov group, and the two groups of
fighters had mostly ignored each other. Now two pairs of F-16 pilots
took their jets low and dashed towards the Soviet amphibious group and
SAG. As they passed within 20 miles they began launching AMRAAMs at the
Helix and Hormone helicopters sanitizing the sea in front of each
formation. The hapless Russian helicopters into the sea one by one,
leaving burning slicks on the surface. The pilots of the Su-33s turned
east to try to intervene, but too late. The Falcon drivers were already
back under the protective umbrella of STANAVFORLANT’s SAM envelope. Then
a more serious threat developed.

ELINT on the NATO AWACS circling south of Bodo began to pick up
indications that a significant number of aircraft were launching from
the Kuznetzov. Over the next several pictures the controllers on the
AWACS began to put the picture together; a dozen Su-33s at various
altitudes were heading straight for the ships of STANAVFORLANT. The F-16
pilots on CAP climbed to altitude and turned to intercept. The ready
birds at Vaernes launched to pack up their comrades.

Radar jamming from the Soviet ships made long-range engagement in the
dark difficult, and the Falcon jocks had to close to within five miles
to launch their AMRAAMs and Sidewinders, but the Russians were suffering
from the same disadvantages, and their pilots couldn’t pick the
Americans out of the electronic haze. As the American missiles began to
connect the Soviet formation fell apart. USS Moosburger added several
SM-2s to the fray, and within a few minutes the Soviet raid had been
turned back with heavy losses. Kuznetsov’s air group had been
significantly reduced.

In the meantime, another Soviet push was developing over north Norway,
but AFNORTH was preparing their own attack against the Russian surface
forces. The ground crews for the twelve SEPECAT Jaguars of No. 54 RAF
squadron had completed their arming and fueling of the attack jets and
the pilots had completed their mission briefs and were climbing into the
cockpits. The target for this first strike would be the Russian SAG
moving south along the coast. If this force could be neutralized than
the landward flank of the Russian offensive would be exposed, and
STANAVFORLANT would be free to duel with the escorts of the amphib
group.

The strike by Norwegian F-5s the previous day had been less than
successful and had incurred heavy losses, but the British jets had some
advantages the Norwegian pilots did not. First, they were equipped with
GBU-24 Paveway laser guided bombs that could be lofted at their targets
from up to eight miles away. Also, four EF-111 Spark ‘Varks had flown
into Vaernes from England. These would provide jamming support for the
attack. Finally, STANAVFORLANT would support the attack with an SSM
strike from the southwest. The British attack planes started rolling
down the runway at Orland and the pilots pointed their aircraft north,
out to sea.

**Seventh Post:**

The dozen British pilots in their SEPECAT Jaguars flew north accompanied
by a big EF-111. Captain Miller on board USS Moosburger had come up with
part of the plan of attack. His force was well equipped with anti-ship
missiles, but since he commanded a multi-national squadron his weapons
were of disparate type and capability. The majority of his missiles,
thirty-two in all, were American-made Harpoons with 75 nautical mile
range, but ships in the squadron also carried shorter-ranged Exocets and
Penguin missiles, and eight of the hundred-nautical-mile-ranged
Italian-made Otomats. Trying to plan a coordinated strike with weapons
of such varying capabilities was a tactical conundrum, and Miller had
agreed to contribute his eight Otomats to the strike on the Russian SAG.
He would reserve his Harpoons for the battle with the amphib escorts and
the short-ranged missiles for the transports themselves if all went
well. The SAG, composed of two Kashin class-destroyers tailed by a
Kresta-class cruiser and a Sovremeny-class air defense destroyer, was by
far the weakest of the Soviet task forces in the Norwegian Sea.

Night had fallen as the Jaguar strike neared the Russian ships. On order
from the strike leader, the Italian frigate Perseo turned and her crew
launched the warship’s eight Otomat missiles in quick succession at the
Russian ships ninety miles to the northeast. At the same time, the EW
technician on the EF-111 switched on his jammers and started filling the
scopes of the Russian radar operators with white noise. The missiles
transited the space between the opposing formations in less than ten
minutes. The jamming prevented the Russian defenders from detecting the
incoming missiles until they were within ten nautical miles, so focused
were they on the attack jets approaching from the south at 3,000 meters
altitude.

Once detected, however, the Russian air defenders responded to the
threat swiftly. The air defense officer on the Sovremeny began lofting
his potent SA-N-7 missiles at the incoming column of sea-skimmers.
Several of the SAMs missed in the electronic haze, but other began to
connect. The eight Otomats dropped to six, then five, then two, and then
the Russians were out of time. One of the surviving missiles was lured
away by a chaff cloud and plunged into the sea, but the final Otomat
tore into the front of the Kresta’s superstructure and exploded, killing
the group’s commander and his staff and starting fires inside the ship.

With the missile attack complete, the Russian air defenders were now
free to concentrate their fire on the Jaguars, which were even now
lofting their GBU-24 bombs at the Russian ships, four bombs per vessel.
The Sovremeny continued to fire SA-N-7s as fast as the ships launcher
could cycle up and receive a fresh missile from the magazines. The
Jaguar pilots, now free of their bombs but still lasing their targets
through the darkness via the thermal sights in their TIALD pods, jinked
and turned violently to evade the incoming weapons. Most were
successful, but one of the missiles exploded abeam of the fifth Jaguar
and shredded the aircrafts tail, causing it to tumble into the sea.
There was no parachute. The, suddenly, the Russian air-defense destroyer
was out of missiles, and the bombs continued to arc downward through the
night.

The other ships now added their SA-N-1s and SA-N-3s to the fray, but
these missiles were wholly ineffective in the electronic blanket thrown
out by the EF-111. The first GBU-24s crashed into the two lead Kashins,
penetrated several decks, and exploded. The effect of the 500lb warhead
of the Otomat missile exploding in the Kresta had been deadly. The
effect of four bombs containing 2,000lbs of high explosives striking the
smaller ships was catastrophic. The northern horizon lit up in
successive strobes as one bomb after another demolished the two leading
warships of the Soviet formation. One had taken four hits, the other
two, since the two bombs being guided in by the now destroyed Jaguar
impacted the in the destroyer’s wake. The result was same for both
ships, however; they were literally blown apart.

The damaged cruiser suffered the same fate several seconds later as a
bomb found the magazine for the ship’s anti-aircraft missiles and
ignited them in an incandescent volcano that lit up the dark ocean for
miles around. Last to die was the trailing Sovremeny, the most dangerous
ship in the group but now also the most impotent, having expended all of
its defensive missiles. The four bombs impacted in quick succession,
completely destroying the warship from bow to stern, and with that the
Russian SAG was gone. The seaward flank of the Russian sweep into the
Norwegian Sea was wide open for STANAVFORLANT.

As the eleven Jaguar pilots formed up for their short return flight to
Orland to rearm for another strike, their elation at their victory was
tempered by the loss of one of their own, and also when some of them
reflected that they had just killed around 1,200 Russian sailors. The
destruction, viewed through their targeting pods, had been amazing, and
the death of the Sovremeny had been visible to the naked eye because of
the light cast by the exploding Kresta. The pilots also understood that
their night was not done. Their next strike would hopefully be a
coordinated attack on the Soviet amphibious group in conjunction with
the ten warships of STANAVFORLANT.

**Eighth Post:**

As the ground crews at Orland rearmed and refueled the eleven surviving
Jaguar Gr.1s, the Soviets continued to pressure the air defenses around
Bodo in the north. The Norwegian and Dutch pilots in their nimble F-16s,
backed up by the American Eagle jockeys of the 493rd TFS, were able to
hold their own throughout the night against the Soviet pilots operating
at the limits of their range, though heavy jamming support meant that
the Russians were able to close on Bodo on several occasions. The F-16
drivers also dropped down to low altitude on several occasions to
destroy or turn back low level raids by formations of Su-24s, Tu-22s,
and Tu-16s trying to take advantage of Norway’s mountainous spine to
infiltrate south. The NATO squadrons sustained losses, but the ratio of
friendly to enemy aircraft destroyed was heavily in the allies’ favor.
Then, in the early hours of the morning the stocks of AMRAAM missiles
for the F-15s ran out, and the American pilots were forced to fall back
on stocks of AIM-7M Sparrow IIIs, which performed extremely poorly in
the face of Soviet jamming. NATO losses mounted, but by 0500 on 15
February the Soviets seemed content to accept the status quo and only
keep steady pressure on Bodo.

While the NATO fliers up north were holding Soviet air power at bay, the
Jaguar pilots were preparing for their second maritime strike of the
night. Aboard USS Moosburger, flagship of STANAVFORLANT, Captain Miller
had been planning how to crack the difficult nut the Soviet amphibious
group’s tough escort. It consisted of no less than two Sovremeny-class
air defense destroyers, by far the most dangerous ships in the
formation, two more Kashin-class destroyers that would be dangerous if
the closed with his formation, an Udaloy, a Kresta II-class cruiser, and
two Krivak-class frigates. Miller had been running south with his
formation all night to stay out of range of the Soviet formations SSMs.

During the night Miller had rendezvoused with three of the surviving
frigates of the Norwegian navy as well as a sizeable number of Norwegian
missile boats. Overhead, pilots flying F-16s of the US 77th and 79th
TFSs, newly arrived from bases in the UK, flew CAP. Soviet pilots flying
Su-33s from the Kuznetsov somewhere out to the east declined to test the
NATO task force’s air defenses after their costly raid earlier in the
night. The Falcon pilots had spent much of the night dashing into the
air defense envelope to shoot down successive Russian AEW helicopters
launched by the Kiev in preparation for the planned raid.

Miller’s plan was a repeat of the scheme that had taken down the Soviet
SAG earlier, but bigger. STANAVFORLANT’s ships carried an agglomeration
of anti-ship missiles. They had Perseo had expended its Otomats in the
earlier engagement, which left Harpoons as the weapons with the longest
reach in the task force. Miller had thirty of them, along with a number
of much shorter-ranged Exocets and Penguins. Thirty Harpoons was likely
enough to overwhelm the Russians’ air defenses and score some hits if
the attack was properly synchronized, and the earlier battle had shown
how devastating the Jaguars’ smart bombs could be if they followed the
missiles in. The attack would be supported by two EF-111s from 42nd ECS
for jamming and the surface search radar on a Norwegian P-3 for
surveillance of the Russian ships.

Miller’s ships had been steaming south all night. Now he ordered a
course reversal to his task force on a reciprocal bearing with the
Russians. At Orland, the British pilots were finishing their mission
briefings as the ground crews completed the final checks on their attack
jets and ordnance. The eleven men braved the cold night to walk to their
aircraft, climb into the cockpits and start their engines. By twos the
British jets taxied and took off for the short flight north.

Miller, coordinating the attack from USS Moosburger’s CIC, ordered his
ships to launch their Harpoons in two waves. Fiery arcs leapt from the
NATO ships as the missiles exploded out of their containers before
settling into their wavetop flight profiles. On their course the
missiles passed beneath an EF-111, which was supporting this axis of the
attack by jamming the Russian radars. The Harpoons approached within
eight miles of the Russian ships before SA-N-7s began to explode of the
two Sovremenys’ launch rails.

The Russian defenses did very well, particularly considering that they
quickly had to divide their fire between the incoming missiles and the
eleven Jaguars approaching at low level from the east under the
electronic protection on the second EF-111. But it wasn’t enough. Two
missiles struck one of the Kashin-class destroyers, starting fires that
quickly became uncontrollable. Three more hit the Udaloy, wrecking the
anti-submarine ship above the waterline. The two final missiles impacted
the hull of the eastern-most Sovremeny, but damage control crews quickly
brought the resultant fires and flooding under control, and the ship
remained in the fight. Then the Jaguars began popping up to 10,000 feet
in the arctic darkness to loft their laser-guided payloads.

SA-N-7s smashed one Jaguar, then another, before the British pilots
could release their bombs. A third Jaguar exploded and tumbled into the
sea as the weapons followed their laser beams towards the Russian ships.
Then the bombs began to impact, and if anything the results were more
devastating than in the previous attack. Multiple strobes stabbed the
night as 2000 pounds of high explosives blew apart ship after ship. As
the British pilots turned for home on afterburner, they left in their
wake devastation. Every Russian escort except for a lone Krivak-class
frigate was sunk or sinking.

The severity of losses can be relative. The Soviet Navy had now suffered
two crippling victories at what most would call negligible casualties to
NATO. For the Jaguar squadron, however, the cost had been high. Two more
jets had fallen to Russian missiles in the final seconds of the
engagement, raising the cost to the squadron to six jets in two raids.
In other words, half of the British pilots in the unit had been killed
in a six hour span. But their loss wouldn’t be in vain. With the Russian
transports stripped of their escort, Captain Miller ordered his nimble
Norwegian missile boats north on an intercept course at flank speed.

**Ninth Post:**

As the missiles boats pounded north across the Norwegian sea, the NATO
air forces over Bodo achieved a coup that significantly altered the
equation of combat over north Norway. To date one of the greatest
impediments to the NATO pilots had been two Soviet An-12 jammer aircraft
circling just north of the upper border of Sweden. The operators onboard
had been filling the air with electronic noise, preventing the techs on
the NATO AWACS from gaining a clear picture of the Soviet airborne
deployments and also keeping the NATO fighter pilots from exercising
their advantage in long-range radar guided missiles. This latter problem
became particularly acute after the stocks of AMRAAMs at Bodo ran out
and the F-15 drivers were forced to rely on the much less capable
Sparrows.

The Russians continued to keep pressure on Bodo with desultory thrusts
by pars of fighters. These attacks had fallen into a more or less
comfortable rhythm for both sides during the night. Then in the early
morning hours the two An-12s were relieved by two more. The air ops
officer on the E-3 Sentry south of Bodo saw his chance and spoke a
codeword into his radio handset. Two Dutch F-16 pilots had been circling
south of the airbase waiting for just this order. They switched off
their radars and dove for the rugged mountains which formed the spine of
Norway along the Swedish border, heading north. Russian attack aircraft
had made good use of this route heading south earlier in the day,
remaining undetected until they were almost past Bodo. The ops officer
hoped his fighters could have the same success.

As the two Falcon drivers dipped and bobbed through valleys and over icy
ridges, high above a pair of F-15 jocks occupied the Russian fighter
pilots’ attention by lofting Sparrow missiles into the electronic haze
at long range, forcing the Russians to take evasive action. The Dutch
fighters continued north, apparently undetected, until the lead pilot
judged that they were just beneath the Soviet EW aircraft. At this
point, both pilots flipped on their afterburners, nosed up, and lit on
their radars. The nimble fighters rocketed up through the clouds into
the cold starlit sky as the pilots scanned for the two Russian planes
which had ill advisedly been flying in loose formation. The radar on one
of the Falcons finally burned through the Russian jamming and the
Dutchmen split up, orienting their craft on the now diving Soviets. The
nearest Russian fighter was dozens of miles to the south.

Each An-12 ate a Sidewinder before trailing fire and smoke into the
dense clouds and then the snowfields below. Before the burning airframes
had hit the ground one of the F-16s was rocketing north towards the
circling A-50 Mainstays west of Banak, and the other turned west,
hooking in behind the Bison tankers that had been supporting the
Russians’ southward thrusts. The NATO fighters burst in among the
Russian support aircraft like a fox in the henhouse, twisting this way
and that, loosing AIM-9s and Vulcan bursts and sending wide-bodied
planes with red stars on their tails tumbling through the clouds below.
Two Mainstays died first, then several tankers, and finally several
ELINT Su-24s and Tu-16s.

Further south, the Russian fighters were now stripped of their jamming
support and suddenly vulnerable to the long-armed Sparrow missiles
carried by the American F-15s. In minutes Russian air strength north of
Bodo and south of Banak had collapsed. The Russian air offensive against
central Norway had been broken.

**Tenth Post:**

As the NATO air forces counterattacked north of Bodo, the ten Norwegian
Storm and Hauk class missile boats loosed by Captain Miller on USS
Moosburger closed with the Soviet amphibs, which were not stripped of
all but the thinnest veneer of an escort. The small Norwegian craft had
swung west and then formed into line abreast to sweep into the seaward
flank of the column of Russian LSTs and LSMs centered on the large LPD
Mitrofan Moskalenko. After the strike by the British Jaguars, these were
now escorted by a single Krivak-class destroyer, which was now leading
the column.

Unsurprisingly, the Soviet formation was in disarray after the crippling
losses to their screen. The Russian amphibious commander had been
frantically radioing the senior admiral on Kuznetzov for permission to
turn back. The admiral had refused and instead promised air cover for
the vulnerable transports, but both the Admiral Gorshkov and the
Kuznetsov had already lost significant portions of their air groups and
no Russian jets had as yet appeared over the ships. Confusion and
inertia drove the Russians southward into the jaws of Miller’s trap.

The IR and thermal signatures began to appear on the scopes of the
Norwegian crafts’ advanced optics. As they drew closer the Norwegians
began to pick out the different ships that composed their prey. The
crews on the missile boats still respected the capabilities of the
surviving Russian frigate. Accordingly, the captain of one of the newer
Storm-class boats surged ahead once the frigate’s position in the column
had been confirmed and launched his four advanced Penguin Mk. II
missiles at the Russian. The sea-skimming weapons roared out of their
containers and quickly covered the dozen miles that sperated the
combatants.

The crew of the Russian ship never had a chance. They had expended all
of their SA-N-4 SAMs during the air raid earlier, and without the
powerful radars on the now-sunk Sovremenys they didn’t even detect the
threats until the first Penguin popped up in its terminal maneuver and
dove towards the warship’s superstructure. The performance of the
Penguins was perfect. All four missiles ripped into the enemy ship in
quick succession, wrecking everything above the waterline, igniting
fires that quickly spread out of control, and allowing flooding that
caused the ship to quickly settle.

With the threat from the Russian frigate eliminated, the other Norwegian
missile boats closed with the transports and began to ripple fire their
shorter ranged IR-guided Penguin Mk. Is. Missiles dove and wrecked
transports across the column. The Moskalenko took four hits but the big
craft kept steaming, its crew trying as best they could to fight back
with the ship’s small caliber weapons. As the NATO craft swept into the
formation like cavalry into a wagon train the Norwegians began launching
their torpedoes—each boat carried two—to finish off the burning ships.
Massive explosions sent water columns rising into the air as the big
underwater weapons ripped apart ships from which Russian sailors and
naval infantrymen were already spilling into the icy sea. Out of
torpedoes and wanting tp preserve their remaining Mk. II missiles, the
Norwegian crews finished off the last Russian transports with their
rapid-firing 76mm deck guns. The pyres lit the surface of the Norwegian
Sea marking the death of each Soviet ship along with its crew and
passengers began to wink out one by one as each transport succumbed and
sank beneath the waves. The NATO crews left three boats behind to rescue
survivors, the rest turned to rendezvous again with Captain Miller and
STANAVFORLANT.

With the annihilation of the amphibious convoy the threat to Trondheim
and central Norway had been eliminated. This victory, along with the
success over Bodo, opened up possibilities in the NATO commander’s mind
at AFNN to turn a Russian defeat into a rout. The Soviet naval flank
along the Norwegian coast had been completely caved in. The Kiev-class
carrier Admiral Gorshkov with its depleted air component and a screen
optimized for anti-submarine rather than anti-air defense lay
tantalizingly close as it continued south through the Norwegian sea.

STANAVFORLANT was running out of weapons. The force still has some
short-ranged Exocets, but in reality Captain Miller did not have a
long-ranged punch with which to get at the Russian carrier group. No,
the blow against the Russian carrier would come from the pilots of the
nearly forty F-5As, reinforced F-5Bs from the training squadron, who had
been readying at Orland and waiting for daylight. And now dawn was
breaking on the southeast horizon…

**Eleventh Post:**

The Norwegian F-5s, lacking a radar and any form of long-range missiles,
had suffered during the first days of the war, so much so that they had
all been withdrawn south to Orland to serve as a reserve while the more
modern and capable fighters bore the brunt of the air-to-air
engagements. The surviving F-5As, joined by the two-seat F-5Bs of the
Norwegian Air Force’s training squadron, now formed a numerically
powerful striking force at Orland air station. The pilots had been
preparing all night for a strike on the amphibious group, but with that
force destroyed the staff officers at AFNN had shifted their sights
further out to sea and onto the Soviet task force centered on the
Kiev-class carrier Baku.

The Norwegian aircraft were not ideally equipped for a maritime strike,
being armed with a mixture of old and short-ranged AGM-12B Bullpup
missiles and Mk82 500lb iron bombs, but neither was the Baku group well
configured for air defense, being composed of the Baku itself, two
Udaloy destroyers, a Kresta, a Kashin, and three Krivak frigates. This
major engagement of a 1990s World War three would pit the belligerents
against each other with technology from the 1970s.

The Norwegian pilots would not be alone, however. American F-16s from
the 77th TFS would be flying top cover to protect the F-5s from any
Su-33s trying to interfere from the more distant Kuznetsov group.
Perhaps more importantly, the two EF-111s that had supported the British
Jaguars on the amphib strike would provide EW support to this strike as
well. Finally, the 688-class submarine USS Phoenix had been keeping pace
to the east of the Baku group throughout the night and would contribute
its four Harpoon missiles to the attack. Even with all this, the
Norwegian pilots felt trepidation. A smaller strike by F-5s on a Soviet
SAG the previous day had incurred heavy losses, though that group had
contained one of the dangerous Sovremenys. Regardless, as the weak
winter sun started to brighten in the southeast, the pilots climbed into
their cockpits, started their engines, and taxied towards the runways.
Putting forty-one fighters into the air took time, and the first to
launch loitered (though not yet with intent) until all the F-5s could
proceed northwest in one large strike formation. As the last pair of
Freedom Fighters lifted off from Orland the circling jets turned
northwest on a direct course for Baku.

As the F-5s approached from the south, USS Phoenix rose to communication
depth and received the codeword from AFNN to initiate the attack. A few
moments later four Harpoon missiles launched from the sub’s torpedo
tubes, exploded out of their canisters and settled into their courses,
protected by an electronic cloud provided by the EF-111s. Several miles
behind came the Norwegians in their F-5s, skimming above the frigid
Norwegian Sea wavetops.

Lacking an effective air defense radar and hampered by the American
jamming, the Russian crews didn’t see the missiles coming until it was
almost too late. The SAM operators on the two ships marked for attack,
too Krivaks at the perimeter of the formation, reacted as best they
could, launching SA-N-4s. All told, the four Harpoons performed poorly.
One was knocked down by a SAM, and another passed through the stack of
its target without exploding, leaving a neat hole but no further damage.
But it wasn’t enough. The two surviving missiles plowed into their
respective targets and exploded, crippling both small ships. AGM-12s
fired by the leading F-5s completed the destruction, and the remainder
of the strike swept through the gaping hole in the Soviet formation’s
perimeter.

Past the outer perimeter, the helicopter carrier Baku and a Kresta-class
cruiser formed the center of the Soviet formation. The bulk of the
Norwegian strike now closed in on these two ships while others spread
out north and south to widen the breach in the perimeter. The next
Norwegian Bullpups plowed into the easternmost Udaloy, leaving that ship
without power and burning. Then the SA-N-9s and SA-N-4s launched by the
Baku and its surviving escorts began to find their mark as the Russian
radars began to burn through the jamming. One F-5 was smashed down into
the sea, then two more. Then the Norwegian weapons began to plow into
the Soviet capital ships.

AGM-12s impacted both Soviet ships in quick succession, their 500lbs of
high explosive detonating and ripping apart steel and men. The two dozen
weapons wrecked the Kresta above the water line, leaving that ship
burning furiously. Baku took multiple hits to its hull and began to take
on water, but remained relatively intact and able to fight topside. This
was bad news for the F-5 pilots following the Bullpups in. SA-N-9s
exploded off the carrier’s launchers and 30mm rotary cannons spit flame,
ripping apart three more jets along with their pilots, one of whom was
just releasing his bombs as he was hit. Then the surviving Norwegian
jets swept over the carrier and Mk82 bombs arced downward.

The Soviet defensive fire had an effect. Not a single one of the more
than a dozen bombs meant for the Baku scored a solid hit. Several were
near misses, however, buckling hull plates and exacerbating the already
severe flooding on the Russian ship. The Russian guns continued to track
the NATO jets as they dropped back down to wavetop level and baked for
home, knocking down two more. SA-N-9s continued to chase the Norwegians
as they passed through the southern gap of the Soviet formation that had
just been opened by the demolition of the Kashin destroyer moments
before.

The Norwegians left a shattered task group in their wake as they
withdrew. As the last F-5s passed outside the perimeter of the
formation, the Kresta at the center blew up spectacularly as fire
reached its missile magazines. The Baku was dead in the water with a
list to port that was growing more sever by the minute. The carrier
wouldn’t survive more than two hours. One of the two Krivaks hit had
already slipped beneath the waves, and the other was burning wouldn’t
last much longer. An Udaloy-class and Kashin-class destroyer were in
similar states of destruction. Only one Udaloy and a Krivak remained
unscathed by the Norwegian strike.

The cost had been high, however. Eight single-seat F-5As and two F-5Bs
had been lost, along with their twelve crew. Altogether this amounted to
almost a quarter of the forty-one aircraft committed to the attack. But
they had had dealt the Red Banner Northern Fleet another hammer blow,
their third in twenty-four hours. The Soviet Naval thrust towards
central Norway had been decisively defeated as the remaining ships
turned to withdraw north.

Alongside the defeats suffered in the air, Soviet designs on Trondheim
had been thoroughly defeated.
