**<u>Northern Fury \#11 â€“ Changing of the Guard</u>**

**<u>AAR by Primarchx, Apr 2017</u>**

The game is still in progress but here's how it's going so far...

The scenario starts with the depleted Enterprise CVBG close to 500nm
south of Iceland and steaming east. Her CAG is low on ready aircraft and
A2A stores. To the west the Vinson CVBG, fresh and ready for action, is
steaming hard to relieve the Big E on station to shield the SLOCs from
Soviet bombers. Enterprise has been ordered to meet with an UNREP group,
now coming in from the US coast, south of Newfoundland.

I maintain most of the preset missions, particularly the ASW, tanking
and AWACS ones. It becomes very apparent that the Sovs have a very
strong fighter screen ranging far off the southern coast of Iceland,
nearly on Enterprise's doorstep. There are also many enemy jamming and
recce aircraft aloft, all bracketing the carrier's position. The groups
air defense ships, the Aegis cruisers Anzio and Cowpens along with the
quad-firing Leahy-class cruiser Harry S. Yarnell with long ranged SM-2ER
missiles, are all low on SAMs.

Looking the situation over I determine that it is very unlikely that I
can prevent the Sovs from detecting the Enterprise group without
starting a fight that will undeniably cost me several more airframes. It
is possible to vector Tomcats north from the Vinson to assist in
defending, but Vinson will have problems of her own and expending AAMs
at this point means she'll be weaker once she reaches station. With
orders to remain on the defensive I decide to only put a small number of
aircraft up over Enterprise: a pair of Tomcats, an ASW screen, an E-2
and a EA-6B.

Once set I watch the northern sky intently. Dozens of spikes from
Flanker and Foxhound radars encroach but do not seem to move less than
\~100nm from the Enterprise. For now. An uneasy stillness holds for a
short while my Hawkeye reveals a large group of unidentified bogeys
beginning to gather in the northwest. Has to be bombers. I quickly
rearrange my air defense ships into a tighter formation around the
Enterprise - Cowpens to the northwest, Anzio just southeast, Yarnell to
the east and a Perry-class frigate close in to the northwest on the hope
that it could decoy any ASMs that get through the SAM screen. Given the
number of suspected-bomber contacts I decide that we can probably
weather their attack using SAMs alone and save my fighters for any
follow-up strikes.

Soon afterwards 'Vampire!' calls go out as the contacts confirm their
bomber identities and waves of AS-4 Kitchen heavyweight, supersonic
antiship missiles begin beelining for ships of the Enterprise group. The
attack seems uncoordinated, though, as only groups of 4-6 missiles
appear to be launched in any given salvo. My plan is to begin engaging
with Yarnell's SM-2ERs at extreme range, go after any misses with
Cowpens' slightly older-model SM-2s and clean up any close-in leakers
with Anzio + the SM-1s off the point-defense frigate.

I am very conservative with SAM usage - only 1 SAM per inbound ASM for
the outer two defense layers and one each from the inner ring. Hit
percentages hover between 40%-50% for most engagements. However only a
handful get close enough to trigger close-in defenses and those are on
the forward Spruance destroyers with poor intercept geometry for my
Standards at closer range. In those cases two-shot salvos of SeaSparrows
settle the issue. When the dust settles Cowpens has a dozen SM-2s left,
Anzio 24, Yarnell 1 and the Perry around a dozen. The plan worked! I've
preserved my fighters and their anti-air stores for follow-up attacks
and still have a modicum of SAM coverage. All ships shut down their
radars and go black.

Soon afterwards the E-2 reports that Sov fighter coverage in the north
is withdrawing to Iceland, leaving several jammer aircraft behind,
undefended. The CAP Tomcats and a pair of Hornets zoom up to splash them
with Sidewinders then scoot back home before any Sov fighters can
pursue. Though the fighter screen to the north is soon replenished it is
being left astern at a fast rate as Enterprise finally turns south and
an uneasy peace unfolds.

The next several hours see little air action. Twice I scramble Hornets
to splash any far-south encroaching Sov Tu-16 recon craft but by and
large it appears that the Big E is evading detection. With her airwing
as ready as it's going to be she settles in for a high speed transit on
a dogleg course to rendevous with the UNREP group. I place a long-ranged
MPA ASW screen, Orions out of Newfoundland, far in front of her to drop
sonobuoys and persecute any nearby contacts. The same is done for the
Vinson group. The UNREP RV already has MPA coverage along with a
Sturgeon SSN gatekeeper.

A Torpedo alert goes up from the Vinson group as the group's sole
Burke-class DDG zeroes on a Soviet Sierra II attack boat firing a pair
of SET-80 torpedoes at it from close range! Quickly reversing course the
destroyer fires off a VL ASROC in retaliation and goes to flank speed.
The first VLA misses but a second hits the revealed SSN, sinking it. But
now the race is on. A nearby Viking, launched to assist in the kill if
needed, drops sonobuoys behind the destroyer to track the inbound torps.
It's a close race but the Burke can't outrun the torps and they attack.
One is lured by her Nixie towed decoy while the other, apparently thrown
off by the preceding explosion, misses a high percentage chance to hit.
Threat eliminated, the destroyer rejoins the carrier screen.

Things are not so good for the Sturgeon-class SSN patrolling the UNREP
rendezvous. A nearby P-3 Orion spots a missile burst from the waves as a
sub-launched standoff ASW rocket lances out toward the American SSN. It
is apparent that the Sturgeon, moving at a lively 15kts, must of been
detected in a Soviet sub sonar's convergence zone. The datum is strong
as the ASW rocket drops a torpedo practically on top of it. Within
seconds the USN sub is fatally struck and spirals to the deep.

However the Orion that spotted the launch localizes and prosecutes the
Soviet sub within minutes. Soon a solid sonobuoy fix is made and it
drops a series of lightweight torpedoes that hit then destroy a Soviet
Navy Victor III SSN. Later another slow-moving Victor II SSN is detected
transiting an area still seeded with active sonobuoys from that
engagement and a separate Orion heading on-station is able destroy it.

Another SSN is picked up with a faint CZ contact including a speed and
eastern bearing of travel to the north of the Vinson CVBG. A Canadian
CP-140 Aurora MPA with only minutes left on-station lays a line of
sonobuoys along the eastern edge of the now-expired detection zone along
the narrow limits of the detecting frigate's first CZ. NATO's luck holds
as contact is quickly established with a fast moving Victor III SSN
making 13 kts on an apparent intercept for the carrier group. With only
ten minutes of endurance remaining the Aurora drops a brace of torps
that runs the Soviet sub down and sinks it.

In the space of just a handful of hours four dangerous enemy subs have
been dispatched to the loss of just one US sub. It's apparent that other
subs lay ahead, though, as a pair of Soviet Be-12 ASW aircraft appear on
a course leading toward one of the Vinson's scouting Los Angeles class
subs. Although they turn back, either due to lost contact or fuel
requirements, Tomcats from the Vinson splash them both.

To Be Continued...

Enterprise is now 800nm from Keflavik and made the turn for her SW run
to the UNREP. She did little more than defend herself and send out a
handful of spoiling raids. I thought about using her a/c more
aggressively but when I saw that the Soviet fighters weren't moving to
overfly her I kept them on the deck for defending her later. In fine
naval tradition she would run to fight another day rather than risk
'losing the war in an afternoon'.

By 0000Z 20Feb the commander of the Vinson strike group was firming up
plans for the first fighter sweep against the Soviet BARCAP that was
enduring south of Iceland. ELINT was showing a persistent group of
around a dozen Flankers and perhaps 4-6 Foxhounds maintaining station
near the Vinson's prescribed destination along with a smattering of EW
and Recon aircraft. Another ES-3A flight was launched to come up past
Iceland to the west to see what aircraft lay closer to the airfields
there and to find any radiating ships, helos or ground-based EW radars
that could be detected.

The plan is to launch both squadrons of the Vinson's F-14Ds at around a
500nm range from the Soviet CAP, refuel them from USAF tankers, and move
forward with Prowlers for jamming and an Air Force E-3A for AWACS
support. The AWACS will provide overall fighter control and the Tomcats
will attack from 60-80nm (1/2 - 2/3s AAM range) with their AIM-54Cs
before fading back. The plan is tentatively scheduled to kick off at
0500Z.

ELINT shows two Mainstays and more Flanker, Fulcrum and Flogger CAP on
Iceland. No sign of Soviet surface activity in the Denmark Strait,
however. I think we can discount any significant warship threats for
now.

As 0500 comes up not as many fighters are being seen at the far CAP
location. Are they swapping out and new fighters just aren't on station?
I may amend the plan and send out the Tomcat squadrons staggered by 20
minutes. Just got the Warning Order for 9.5 detailing the plans for
aggressive OCA just as the last Tomcat of the lead squadron takes off on
their sweep!

First squadron, VF-11 Red Rippers, refuels about 150nm south of the
outermost Soviet fighter group. Tankers pull away and head south to
refuel the follow-on squadron, the Tomcatters of VF-31. Immediately
afterwards the AWACS trailing the fighters by a scant 15nm, energizes
it's APY-2 radar and reveals about 13 confirmed Flankers within \~220nm
and a further 8 unidentified bogies. The Red Rippers move forward, noses
cold, with a trailing Prowler of VAQ-139 piping in music.

Moving in undetected to 60nm from the outermost Sukhoi, the nearest
Tomcat fired off a Phoenix missile at 0606Z. The first missile was
spoofed but a follow-up shot connected, downing the first Iceland-based
Sov fighter of the day. Just about that time no less than 20 Soviet
Su-27s begin to realize an attack is approaching and sprint southwest to
engage. Eighteen Tomcats, each with 4 AIM-54Cs and 2 AIM-7Ps await them
and open fire at optimal range. The Prowler evades back to the south and
the AWACS takes a position close enough to provide fighter control but
far enough to stay out of immediate harm.

Missiles were rippled off in both directions. The Russians fearlessly
guided their AA-10s in without flinching but took staggering losses
against the inbound waves of Phoenix missiles. As the Red Rippers pulled
away they had lost only one of their number to around 15 in return!
Decoys and the onboard ASPJ defensive suite of the F-14D saved more than
one pilot from a swim in the North Atlantic. I found that AIM-54Cs were
averaging 80% pk when fired at 60nm against the Flanker, if they got
past jammers and chaff.

Accelerating back toward the carrier at high speed VF-11 meets the
still-fresh VF-31 Tomcats boring in to blunt pursuit. A smattering of
about ten remaining Su-27s were moving southwards in small packets of
two or three. At least three of them launched missiles well outside of
80nm and homing off to the east, perhaps fooled by Prowler jamming. Even
within 60nm, where the Tomcats began firing at them, the inbound Sukhois
continued to fire wildly, off track of the inbound US fighters. Only one
seemed to track true and it's guiding a/c was shot down well before the
SARH AA-10s could strike. Off to the east ELINT picked out MiG-31 radars
but none of them seemed interested in this battle.

The last pair of pursuing Flankers RTB after a brief supersonic pursuit.
Looking over the Losses and Expenditures tally I see I launched 55
Phoenix and a few AIM-7P and 31 Su-27S and a Su-24E had been lost. I
think a few of those Flanker losses were in place before this mission
(lost due to fuel loss or something?) but I think at least 25 were
downed during the sweep. In return a single F-14D was shot down.

Tankers and AWACS are sent back to Goose Bay and all fighters other than
a couple of back-stop pairs of Hornets are recovered by 0743Z, 20Feb.
Plans for another sweep when the carrier approaches 300nm from her
patrol area, perhaps 10 to 12 hours from now, are made.
