**<u>Northern Fury \#34 – The Longest Battle</u>**

**<u>AAR by Ferret69, Sep 2016</u>**

WARNING: THIS AAR WILL CONTAIN SPOILERS!

**Northern Fury 12.6: The Longest Battle AAR *\[Note, scenario number
later changed to NF \#34\]***

So I’ve never done one of these before but after reading Airborne
Rifle’s Northern Fury AAR over on Groghead’s and Tailhook’s ongoing AAR
on the first Caribbean Fury scenario I decided why not do one of these.
Then I made a possibly fatal decision; let’s do Northern Fury 12.6! In
case you don’t know Northern Fury is a collection of scenarios created
by Gunner98 (full props to him) that detail a 1994 global war and the
North Atlantic/Norway part of it. 12.6 details trying to shepherd
convoys across the Atlantic whilst dealing with all sorts of spot crises
as well. The possibly fatal part of it is its length; 1 in game
month…this ought to be great fun…

The setup is a big one; I’ve got around 400+ merchants either sitting in
port or milling around aimlessly without escort, I have submarines
moving in to box in the Argentines who have been looking a bit
opportunistic recently, I’ve also got most of Central America trying to
kill me. Almost forgot; there are 60 something enemy submarines milling
about the Atlantic and the Caribbean.

The way I’m going to do this AAR is a narrative based on every 6-24
hours of NF 12.6 (depending on how interesting those hours are) followed
up by a status report talking plans, strategy and losses and
expenditures, hope you enjoy.

On SSN 674 Trepang Lieutenant Commander Robert Galyvon was irritated to
say the least, whilst the rest of the fleet was in exciting roles like
protecting Strike Fleet Atlantic or preparing to see off a possible
Argentinian attack here he was sailing on what seemed like a pleasure
cruise between Florida and Cuba. The boat was his though and he believed
in his crew to be able to serve the US Navy well whatever their role in
this war. He was about to go to bed when a sonar operator shouted

“Goblin, approx 44 nautical miles to the east!”

He scrambled to the sonar operator and asked him what he thought it was.
The sonar operator replied

“It’s real quiet sir, could be a new red boat, might also be a Kilo on
batteries though.”

“Should we try to close and destroy it?” Galyvon asked.

“No sir I don’t think so, this thing is almost silent and we could well
lose contact and get ambushed by it” the sonar operator said “No I think
that we should go to periscope depth and get a Viking from the JFK group
and have them safely prosecute it.” he continued.

“I agree, ok go to communication depth and signal Kennedy”.

5 minutes later an ASW armed S-3B Viking catapulted off the deck of the
John.F.Kennedy and headed South.

70 minutes after the S-3B had taken off it arrived on station, talking
to controllers on an E-2 Hawkeye lurking North of Cuba and began the
hunt for this mystery contact. Trepang however was also closing in but
had not heard a sound from the strange goblin they’d detected, this
didn’t annoy Galyvon though, he’d been in the game a long time and new
two things; ASW was a patient man’s game and that aeroplanes were a
submariner’s worst nightmare and he’d just been informed that one had
come to visit his ghost-like friend.

Meanwhile, East of Cuba, the men of TG Dale; consisting of the USS Dale
(CG-19) and HMS Westminster (F 237) were busy, they’d been at General
Quarters earlier having had to prepare for a possible air attack before
F-14’s from the Kennedy group had splashed the intruders, now they were
talking to another of Kennedy’s planes, this time an S-3 armed with
Harpoon’s and a small ASW load, who was busy investigating a horde of
contacts to the southwest and had just found that they were small patrol
boats, no major threat to the Dale group. The S-3 did say however that a
couple of missile corvettes were mixed in there and thus attacked an Osa
I with one of his two Harpoon missiles. The AGM-84 speared into the
small craft just under its bridge, destroying it instantly. The S-3 was
then ordered to investigate more contacts further south and then, once
it had expended its Anti-Surface ordinance, join the hunt for the
phantom sub.

Suddenly an operator in the first S-3 that had arrived on scene off Cuba
shouted

“Got a medium on number 7!”

The pilot then began to bank and readied to do a MAD run and deploy an
active sonobuoy before attacking the contact with the Mk50 Barracuda’s
he had on board. While he was doing this another operator shouted

“Contact firming up, he’s on a bearing of 284 and is doing 5 knots,
depth still unknown.”

“He’s definitely an SSK sir, maybe snorkelling?”

The Mk50 dropped out of the S-3B on a bearing-only launch and
immediately sped away, towards the as yet unwitting submarine; it was
joined seconds later by another Barracuda.

Aboard the Kilo Class submarine Delfin Captain First Rank Javier Ortiz
heard the cries of the sonar operators;

“High-frequency pinging to port captain!”

Ortiz cringed inside for he knew that he done so well at avoiding the
imperialists! Indeed how they had even guessed he was here was beyond
him. He could have sworn that he had avoided them but he also knew that
he must deal with the present and that it included two Americano
torpedoes. There was a problem however, he was unable to radically
increase speed without losing the ability to snorkel, he could
crash-dive but he knew to Yankee’s would just harass him until he had to
surface.

“Bring course to 4-2 and launch 2 noisemakers!” Ortiz ordered.

The crew responded gallantly and took about their task with a quiet
energy.

As the first Mk50 zoomed in at 60 knots it encountered the two
noisemakers Ortiz had launched seconds earlier and it veered off,
exploding harmlessly. Javier was pleased with the results and started to
persuade himself that he could also foil the second torpedo that was
rapidly approaching and indeed he did. On the S-3 the crew were
impressed with this Russian or Cuban captain; he had avoided them for an
hour and a half and then managed to dupe two of their torpedoes. This
guy was clearly good however the S-3B crew planned to show him some of
their tricks, the next torpedo he dropped would be close, very close.
They were gonna get him.

Ortiz and his crew were delighted; they’d foiled the capitalist attack
and had now put on speed, heading West however

“High-frequency pinging to port again sir!”

“How many and how close?” Javier demanded

“1 sir and 0.4 nautical miles away.” came the reply.

A wave of fear passed over Javier and the men of his crew for 0.4
nautical miles was not a lot of time for countermeasures but they would
still have to try;

“Bring the ship about, hard turn to starboard!” Ortiz cried.

As the Mk50 bored in and impacted the whole ship shook but the crew of
Delfin also realised that the warhead was a small one, they may survive
yet!

“Damage report” Ortiz ordered

“The diesel is out sir, we’re bringing on the auxiliary and emergency
systems but we must reduce speed.” replied the chief engineer

“Our sonar is also badly hit” added the chief sonarman. Javier Ortiz
however was unfazed

“You heard the engineer” he bellowed “reduce the speed.”

It wasn’t fair really, the target was barely fighting but the S-3B gang
was still pleased with the result as their last Mk50 impacted the Delfin
and the submarine began her last, fateful dive.

Near the Panama Canal a dramatic air battle had begun. After a Coast
Guard aircraft had been driven off from the borders of Nicaragua by 3
MiG-21’s a pair of Air National Guardsmen from Howard Air Force Base had
destroyed the MiG’s all had seemed to be okay. However around 15 minutes
after the MiG’s had entered the drink the men of TG South Carolina
picked up something new; a 12 aircraft raid from Nicaragua. The sailors
scrambled to General Quarters and sent of a terse warning to Panama
Command. The remaining two ANG F-16’s then took off from Howard and
headed in, they planned to shoot down four planes and leave the rest to
the SAM’s of TG Carolina. As the two Guardsmen raced in 8 of the
aircraft turned to face them. The F-16’s volleyed a pair of AIM-7’s at
two of the planes; both of the AIM-7 volleys had at least one hit,
knocking a pair of Mirage V interceptors from the sky. Soon the enemy
formation was in AIM-9 range and all 4 AIM-9’s lanced through the air to
score 4 hits. The ANG pilots were astounded; they’d downed 6 planes in
under a minute! But they both knew that the job wasn’t done. Even though
they had only cannon remaining the two F-16’s bored in at afterburner
towards the Nicaraguan jets. One Mirage V launched a missile but the
F-16 targeted spiralled upwards and launched chaff that the French-built
missile detonated into. As he watched his wingman take evasive action
the leader carved through the remaining Nicaraguan’s and unleashed a
burst of 20mm fire at one plane whose pilot was killed in the head-on
engagement. Seeing his leader dead and his hopes dashed by the seemingly
invincible American aircraft the last escort tried to turn for home but
the ANG crew gave him no mercy and they sped behind him, unleashing
another burst. The Mirage V’s fuel line burst and the fuel began to
spill into the engine, causing a spontaneous detonation that tore
through the rear of the Nicaraguan’s plane. As the F-16’s cherished
their kill they turned back to their original target; the strikers.

The 4 striker’s had been confident in their escorts ability to destroy
the intruding American’s so listening to the radios of their comrades
became more and more terrifying; eight of the best planes in Nicaragua’s
Air Force destroyed? Without a single kill? The Mirage drivers then did
what their Cuban trainers had taught them; go low. Aboard the South
Carolina the men were amazed; this pair of so called “second-line
fliers” had annihilated a fair chunk of Nicaragua’s Air Force and the
rampage wasn’t yet over. As the F-16’s motored in they began to descend
to attack the Mirage’s, they began to punch through the clouds, as they
did so the 4 Nicaraguan’s appeared; throttling it at wave-top level.
Soon however they began manoeuvring, minus two of their colleagues who
was splashed in the initial pass by the Falcon’s. As the Falcon drivers
ascended another Mirage was blotted from the sky, destroyed by an SM-2
from the South Carolina. However at this point the Falcons were low on
fuel and out of everything so a decision was made to let one Mirage
escape and “deliver the news” on the invincible American planes. As the
F-16’s landed the pilots walked to the Ops Room a communications officer
handed them a message from the South Carolina Group:

Beer’s on us.

Strategy:

For my North Atlantic ASW strategy I’m not going to try and blanket the
whole Atlantic with buoys, rather just the areas around the convoys and
other major groups or exposed ships. While this takes place my SURTASS
ships will just head back and forth, calling in planes on those who they
detect and my own subs will just hunt freely. In the Falkland’s I’ve
found a nice strategy through which I can shoot down their planes
without getting a declaration of war, that will continue until if/when
the do declare war. In the Caribbean Cuba’s striking power is mostly
depleted but I trashed a Kilo, their Osa’s and a bunch of their planes
just to make sure. An uneasy peace basically rests between them and me
now. I’ll try not to provoke Venezuela but I’m moving the P de Asturias
Group (Spanish CVBG) into the Caribbean to give me a continued presence
there. I really screwed up losing that RQ-2A, I’m still damning myself
even now.

As night descended across Europe the men of TG Papa were watching a
sunset as an alarm sounded; two torpedoes were headed for the Alfonso
Cerqueria. The men of the group rushed to battle stations only to see
the aging Portuguese frigate have its back broken by the two Russian
torpedoes. The site both saddened and enraged the crew of the Vasco De
Gama who were pleased to hear that a helicopter had been launched from a
nearby American frigate to wreak vengeance on the Soviet dog who’d dared
to attack their brethren.

Aboard the Soviet submarine Novosibirsk Captain First Rank Alexei
Ferozov was pleased; he’d just torpedoed an imperialist frigate and
gotten away with it, as he was preparing to attack the next imperialist
his sonar operator shouted a terse warning;

“Helicopter overhead, high-frequency pinging next to us sir”

Ferozov went cold but immediately issued an order to his crew to take
the Novosibirsk deep and try to run. The American SH-2G wasn’t shaken
off that easily though, instead he continued to drop sonobuoys around
the Soviet sub as he prepared his attack. As he went in the pilot
released his two Mk46’s and was not pleased with the result; one Mk46
failed on launch and sunk but the other flew through a hole in the water
made by the Kilo. However a Lynx from the Vasco De Gama soon arrived and
its Mk46’s did not malfunction.

Further North much the same pattern was playing out. A Kilo Class had
been caught trying to stalk and strike a convoy by an Atlantique I MPA
who promptly closed and destroyed the contact. The convoy commander was
feeling quite pleased until he received a message detailing the loss of
the Alfonso Cerqueria. His face was impassive but inside it was a
boiling point, the main one being, how many more?

Over the Panama Canal another two ANG pilots were up, preparing to
escort an AC-130 that was going to fly over Nicaragua to hit targets,
somewhat for revenge after the Nicaraguan’s tried to strike TG South
Carolina. They were talking to each other about the success of the other
two pilots when a quick transmission from Howard AFB ordered them to
prosecute some Nicaraguan targets who were getting a bit too
enthusiastic around a reconnaissance aircraft. The two pilots banked
their planes and headed out to greet their new guests.

Aboard an E-8A JSTARS aircraft the crew were resting, the Cuban’s hadn’t
sent anything in hours and this flight was simply a one-off ELINT and
recon mission so that Air Force strikers could come later, soon the two
E-8’s would be deployed as well, to a role more fitting of their
considerable talents. This then was the atmosphere when one specialist
on bard shouted “I’ve got a Goblin!’’. Everyone turned their heads at
that; Goblins were underwater, how the hell did they find one? The crew
soon realised though that how they found it didn’t matter, the fact they
had found it did. “Send a message to the JFK.” the pilot ordered.

Ten minutes later the following message appeared in the hands of the
John.F.Kennedy’s captain;

//FLASH//

FR:16 ACCS E-8

TO: Cmdr, John.F.Kennedy

SUBJ: POSREDFLTSUB

1\. @2336 FEBURARY 23 A GOBLIN WAS DETECTED @ N26.007654, W77.40941.

2\. GOBLIN WAS SUBSEQUENTLY CLASSIFIED AS A REDFLT SUB.

3\. REQUEST SUPPORT TO PROSECUTE TARGET.

16 ACCS E-8 SENDS.

OUT.

“Interesting, a Sov sub taking a cruise in the Bahamas?” the captain
said.

“Seems so, maybe he wants to swim with the natural sharks.” the
messenger joked.

“Anyway, I’m backing the Air Force pukes, get an S-3 there.”

“Yes sir!”

As the pilots of an S-3B took off and headed for this mystery contact
the two ANG pilots were up to their knees in Nicaraguan goons. 2 had
already bitten the dust and 3 more would go swimming in the next couple
of minutes. The two pilots knew that they still, and probably never
would, equal the destruction of the 16 aircraft raid they also knew that
they were some of the highest-scoring pilots in NATO and certainly the
Air National Guard. As they turned to Nicaragua’s coast they heard a
single transmission;

“Spooky inbound”.

Aboard the S-3 the pilot looked out of the cockpit and saw an incredible
sight; a Russkie sub ran aground! No wonder the E-8 picked it up, it was
beached on a Bahamas’ sandbar. Didn’t mean it didn’t need to die though
and one quick Mk50 convinced the sailors of Vyborg that further attempts
to save their ship was futile and soon the crew of the S-3 saw scores of
Soviet submariners pour out of the hull to wait internment as POW’s.

Strategy:

My plan for blanketing the convoys with AS /assets has done well, with 2
subs dead in 6 hours as they tried to hit the convoys (the Romeo and the
Victor I FYI). Whilst the loss of Alfonso Cerqueria hurts she’ll be
replaced by more capable frigates over the coming days, I think I’m
getting a German one soonish. The Argentinian’s have been very docile
since their two recce birds disappeared, so that’s good. Nicaragua
continues to have an Air Force not even worth the name.
