**Caribbean Fury \#5 Caribbean Cruise, 1994**

**1 April 1994, 1400 Zulu, 0900 Local**

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf5\media\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.87014in" alt="Aruba your way: tips for lovers, thrill seekers, foodies and more - Lonely Planet" />

Six weeks into the war and the situation in the
[Caribbean](http://northernfury.us/blog/post20/) has fallen into
something of a routine. Beyond an occasional Soviet submarine, the area
has been quiet for over a month.

Of course, there is always one fly in the ointment, and here is it
Venezuela. Rhetoric and accusations over the strike at Manodez Air Base,
as well as strong evidence that Soviet submarines are still replenishing
at *Puerto La Cruz* have fueled the tensions but so far, restraint has
been shown by both sides.

Growing intelligence indicators, however, predict that this situation is
about to change. Both Dutch and British sources are warning of a
potential Venezuelan move on either Trinidad & Tobago or the Dutch ABC
Islands (Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao), or both. With NATO forces focused
on protecting merchant shipping, the thought is that Venezuela will try
for a quick grab at the islands and present the US with a *fait
accompli*, before standing down and offering a quick cessation of any
hostilities.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf5\media\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:2.81597in" alt="USS Albany (CA-123, later CG-10)" />

----------------

**<u>Caribbean Fury \#5</u>** this is theÂ fifth and final scenario of a
short campaign. You are commander of the newly re-established US
4<sup>th</sup> Fleet with your flag aboard the re-commissioned ***USS
Albany (CG-10)***. The ***Albany*** originally commissioned nine months
after the end of World War Two and she has seen her share of sea miles,
just like many of the ships under your command. Your primary task is to
ensure the safety of merchant shipping gathering in convoy assembly
areas, while keeping a weather eye on Venezuela. The Dutch and the
British have wider concerns but fewer resources.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf5\media\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.32639in" alt="A port side view of the Venezuelan (Italian-built) Lupo class frigate ALMIRANTE JOSE DE GARCIA (F-26) underway - U.S. National Archives &amp;amp; DVIDS Public Domain Search" />
