**Northern Fury 8 - Plug the Gap**

16 February 1994, 0001 Zulu, 0001 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf8\image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:5.93472in" alt="Denmark Strait - Wikipedia" />

Steaming North as the fourth day of a new global war opens, you are in
**Command of the HMS Invincible Task Group** and are heading into harm’s
way!

Dawn yesterday saw an amphibious assault around Trondheim. It looks like
the Norwegians with the able help of 3 Royal Marine Commando Bde are
holding, but pressure from the north is forcing the Norwegian Army to
collapse southwards. Narvik fell late yesterday afternoon. STANAVFORLANT
is withdrawing in tatters with the remaining surface units of the
Norwegian fleet – they are out of it for a bit.

Reports from Iceland are vague, but it appears that Spetsnaz forces have
captured several out-ports and key radar installations have been knocked
out. The Americans are looking after that sector, but you are keen to
understand what is going on there as it has a direct bearing on your
command. You expect the hammer to fall either in Iceland or here at the
UK end of the GIUK Gap.

The GIUK (Greenland – Iceland – United Kingdom) Gap is the
1000-mile-wide entrance into the North Atlantic; if the Soviets control
this area, NATO reinforcement and supply convoys to Europe are
threatened. In peacetime a string of radars and SOSUS network provide
early warning, backed up by fighter and maritime patrol aircraft in
Keflavik Iceland and bases in Scotland. In reality this serves as
nothing more than a tripwire to allow NATO forces to steam north and
‘Plug the Gap’.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf8\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.35625in" alt="A large ship in the water Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#8</u>** The central portion of the GIUK gap is
perhaps the most vulnerable, but also difficult to attack. The Soviets
would not likely wish to invade Scotland proper as that would entail a
large-scale land-based fight with the UK and reinforcements direct from
the US. An unwanted distraction which would open up too many
vulnerabilities. Instead, there are several island chains which could
achieve the desired result of opening up access to the Atlantic. Key
among these archipelagos is the Faroe Islands which are Danish, and to a
lesser extent, and more dangerous to assault are the British Shetland
islands, the outer Hebrides or even the Orkneys.

NATO is struggling to pin down where the Soviets will make their main
push. Being strong everywhere is difficult but divining where to put the
weight of defensive effort is confounded by deception, misinformation
and feints.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf8\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.13264in" alt="Baltic Fleet warship lands amphibious assault force onto coast in western Russia drills - Military &amp;amp; Defense - TASS" />
