**Spanish Naval Aviation**

The primary focus of Spanish Naval Aviation is providing aircraft for
operations on board ships, both the Principe de Asturias and other ships
in the fleet. The Spanish Air Force operates the fleet of P-3Bs and
other Maritime Patrol Aircraft (MPA) and Sea Air Rescue (SAR) /assets.
All /assets are based at NAS Rota.

**EAV-8S Matador**

![](/assets/images/nato/es/navy/naval-aviation/image1.jpg)Spain’s
9<sup>th</sup> Escuadrilla operates 12 AV-8B Harrier II’s, called the
EAV-8S Matador from the Principe de Asturias. A 13<sup>th</sup> aircraft
is available for shore based training, maintenance training and
emergency replacement at Rota. These are the ‘Day Only’ Aim-9 equipped
versions, however an order has been placed to upgrade them to the ‘+’
standard. Unfortunately, this will not happen during Northern Fury.

**SH-70B-1 Seahawk**

These 12 new Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) helicopters operate off of the
six Santa María-class frigates are provided by the 10<sup>th</sup>
Escuadrilla. Essentially the same as the American SH-60B, these aircraft
work will with the Oliver Hazard Perry based Frigates and provide a
powerful ASW system to protect the aircraft carrier or on independent
patrol.

![](/assets/images/nato/es/navy/naval-aviation/image2.jpg)

**Sea King**

![](/assets/images/nato/es/navy/naval-aviation/image3.jpg)The
Spanish Navy operates three different versions of Sea King. The initial
purchase was for 18x SH-3D, and between that time and 1994, 6 of these
were written off. Eight of the remaining 12 were upgraded to the SH-3H
(HS.9) standard, to carry on ASW work, while the remaining 4 were
converted to SH-3G utility/transport versions. Further, in 1985, three
SH-3W were obtained for Airborne Early Warning (AEW). It is unclear if
these were converted from the remaining SH-3G or were a new purchase.
All are operated by 5<sup>th</sup> Escuadrilla and the ‘H’ and ‘W’
variants operate off the Principe de Asturias.

**AB212**

3<sup>rd</sup> Escuadrilla operate two versions of this versatile
helicopter. Of the original 8 obtained for ASW work, 4 remain in that
task, while the 4 others were converted to Electronic Warfare (EW).
These aircraft would work either off of the aircraft carrier or on
special missions as non of the other Frigates were able to house a
helicopter.

![](/assets/images/nato/es/navy/naval-aviation/image4.jpg)

**Hughes 500ASW Defender**

![](/assets/images/nato/es/navy/naval-aviation/image5.jpg)Used for
local ASW tasks or for short journeys on the Serviola-class patrol boat,
6<sup>th</sup> Escuadrilla operated six of these small aircraft.

**Cessna Citation II**

4<sup>th</sup> Escuadrilla operates 4 of these executive jets as well as
several other small transport aircraft for general transport tasks,
