<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig21\image1.jpg" style="width:5.72917in;height:2.5625in" />

[**MiG-21 ‘Fishbed’**](http://www.airvectors.net/avmig23.html)Although
over 11,000
[Fishbeds](http://www.topedge.com/panels/aircraft/sites/kraft/mig1.htm)
were built and production did not end until 1985, only about 2000 remain
in service with the Soviet Air Forces (VVS and PVO). This hugely
successful aircraft was introduced in 1959 and served in over 60
different air forces around the world. The delta wing, supersonic jet
could reach Mach 2, had a very low radar cross section and proved very
versatile in many roles. The MiG-21 has an impressive combat record,
shooting down over 100 aircraft, 56 in Viet Nam including 37 F-4
Phantoms.

If you’re interested in all of the MiG-21 variants which exist(ed) you
should look
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Mikoyan-Gurevich_MiG-21_variants),
there are dozens. For our purposes, the Soviet Union in 1994 is still
using three main types, although many experimental versions are still in
operation.

**MiG-21R Fishbed-H**: The reconnaissance version of this venerable
aircraft equipped with either a daylight camera pod, a nighttime camera
pod, a general purpose ELINT (Electronic Intelligence) pod, or a TV
motion picture pod. About 320 of these aircraft remain but only 60 are
in service while the remainder are in reserve.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig21\image2.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.43681in" />

**MiG-21UM Mongol –B**: This two seat trainer is used both by Frontal
Aviation forces (VVS) and Air Defence Forces (PVO) to introduce their
trainee pilots to combat aircraft. The VVS uses about 360 while the PVO
retains 120 of these airframes and there are about 300 in reserve.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig21\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.21875in;height:4.17215in" />

**MiG-21Bis Fishbed-L/N**: This is the last development in the design
with an improved engine and many other improvements. Sometimes called
the fourth generation (sometimes the ultimate third generation) the
‘Bis’ is adaptable for either ground attack with a wide variety of
bombs, or air to air combat with the very effective short range AA-8
Aphid missile. The PVO operates about 200 of Fishbed-L, equipped with
the *Lazur* GCI (Ground Control Intercept) system while the VVS uses
about 800 Fishbed-H equipped with Polyot ILS (Instrument Landing
System). Slightly more than 1000 remain in reserve.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig21\image4.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.4in" />
