**USSR Submarines**

In Soviet naval doctrine, the submarine is paramount as the most
survivable asset that is able to strike the enemy hard, by using both
speed and stealth to achieve devastating results. A contrary doctrine
claims that submarine is the best weapon to protect the nuclear
deterrence force in the form of SSBNs and keep American and NATO forces
away from the Soviet littoral both on the Arctic and Pacific coasts.
These two doctrines, while divergent in aim, are not mutually exclusive;
striking the enemy fleet or commerce routes is an excellent way of
keeping him occupied and away from your littoral, while maintaining a
viable nuclear deterrence and maintaining the ability to strike (fleet
in being) limits an enemies options. Doctrinal wrangling aside, the
Soviets maintain twice as many submarines as the US and almost as many
as all nations in NATO
combined.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/navy/ssn/image1.jpeg)![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/navy/ssn/image2.jpg)All
Soviet subs are double hulled, meaning that they have a ‘Light Hull’ of
thin steel as an outer hull, forming the hydrodynamic shape of the boat.
The light hull allows the attachment of machinery, equipment and missile
tubes which will not affect the integrity of the inner hull. The much
stronger inner, or ‘Pressure hull’ which withstands the immense
compressive force that seawater at depth will apply against the hull.
Having a smaller pressure hull which is not penetrated by machinery or
missile tubes is much more efficient to construct as the inner hull is a
very complex, heavy and precise structure to build. The double hull also
adds a degree of survivability to Soviet subs as damage to the outer
hull does not affect the integrity of the inner.

With some exceptions most Soviet submarines have two reactors and most
of the older boats have two propeller shafts. Newer attack submarines
(SSN) only have one propeller and shaft but may have two reactors.

The Soviets have a habit of holding onto older equipment and converting
it to new uses, this was happening long before the increased tensions of
Northern Fury. One good example is the conversion of Yankee class
ballistic missile submarines (SSBN) into; attack boats (SSN), two types
of guided missile boats (SSGN), The Yankee Notch, and Yankee Sidecar, as
well as several test bed projects and a mothership for mini-subs. One
other practise in the Soviet Navy is to change names and hull numbers
regularly, making the tracking of hulls confusing and somewhat of a
guessing game.

In comparison to US and other NATO submarines, the Soviet subs are more
rugged and probably more survivable, but also noisier and easier to
detect, with generally less advanced and older technology. Reliability
and safety is also an issue, five nuclear submarines have sunk since
1970, one of them twice, and several more have needed extensive
refitting after fires. (compared to two US nuclear submarines sunk in
the 1960s) However the story at this
[link](https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/vol52no3/unravelling-a-cold-war-mystery.html)
shows how the Soviets can break the mold and should not be discounted
from a technology standpoint.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/navy/ssn/image3.jpg)
