**<u>Northern Fury \#3 – Dagger to the Heart</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, Apr 2021</u>**

This scenario is also set on the first day of WW3. On a cold, murky
February morning, the Soviets launch a spoiling attack on various
targets around the American coast, with the action here focusing on
events near New York. You can play either side, but it is much more of a
challenge from the US point-of-view.

As the briefing makes clear, this is not a standard CMO scenario. It
isn’t really possible to ‘win’, there are no victory levels and it is
best viewed as part of an ongoing story, with lots of experimental rules
to try-out. Some of these work better than others and the overall feel
is a bit buggy, but it has its good points.

You are placed in the role of local US Coast Guard commander, though
various naval /assets will be made available during the 12-hour scenario.
Initially, you have three Coast Guard cutters, one of which (Dallas) has
some ASW capability, the others just light guns. The destroyer Mahan is
inbound to the SSE of NYC and the SSN Alexandria is cruising offshore to
the ENE, not that she’s useful for much. Gabreski Air Station hosts an
assortment of choppers, plus some Hercules SAR/recon/tanker aircraft and
even a few F-16s. Near Norfolk, Virginia is Oceana Station, where there
are some Orions and more choppers. Only two of the Orions have an ASW
loadout.

If you expand the map to view the whole of the USA, you will see a weird
assortment of damage markers relating to the shipping around New York
Harbor sitting off California (!!), along with the destroyer Spruance
and a frigate, USS Sides. Some or all of this will teleport to the area
of operations as the game progresses, depending on events!.

There’s lots of civilian shipping to protect, including the iconic liner
QE2. A cloud of civilian aircraft will develop over the city’s many
airports as the morning wears on.

Given the nature of the scenario, I chose not to check-out the Soviet
forces on Browse Scenario Platforms. Not having read the book (though I
plan to sometime) or read any AARs, I therefore left myself open to
surprise. The briefing did tip me off about a Soviet spy ship near the
Dallas and a Bulgarian-registered trawler leaving the port after
‘repairs’.

I expected a combination of subs, mines and Spetsnaz attacks in a
large-scale version of Choking Halifax. Accordingly, I made sure my
ships were moving slowly and warily and got ASW planes (such as I had)
in the air early, along with available SAR /assets. Most aircraft only
become available gradually over the course of the game.

I wasn’t expecting a large-scale attack with cruise missiles. Very soon,
a patrolling Sentry AWACS reported lots of incoming Shipwreck and Siren
missiles, which could only have come from subs. My CAP did their best
and managed to down a few of them and the Mahan successfully defended
herself from those that came her way, but serious damage was inevitable.
Numerous civilian ships were hit and sunk, as was the cutter Tahoma. A
couple of missiles were wasted on small 100-200 ton fishing boats but,
at the other end of the scale, the QE2 was hit twice and left in a
sinking condition. Some of the victims fell to submarine torpedoes,
which gave me a fix on the likely positions of the culprits. Ships lost
cost from 5 to 200 VP and this put me in a serious deficit situation.

While this was going on, the Dallas intercepted the AGI Kursograf and,
following instructions from the briefing, stopped her with 76mm shells.
It was then possible to board the ship by moving the cutter nearby, but
the Russians then scuttled her, killing some of the boarding party.
Prisoners were nonetheless taken and a few VP were scored by having a
Dolphin chopper take them to Oceana for questioning (you can use any
Dolphin and it is just assumed that she called by at the Dallas on the
way).

Similarly, the small cutter Adak overhauled the trawler Trog and stung
her with 25mm gunfire. She pulled-over, but some hostiles tried to
escape in a RHIB (rigid-hulled inflatable boat). Adak duly sank this and
took prisoners. Unfortunately, the Trog had already dumped her load of
mines in the Harbor entrance.

Gabreski had four Sea Dragon choppers with minesweeping gear and I
created a suitable mission and got them on the case as quickly as I
could. They actually swept six mines, but this didn’t help much. Despite
shipping being restrained from leaving the port, incoming vessels just
tried to barge through under AI control and two were sunk (though this
actually scored us VP for the rescue of their survivors by the Harbor
authorities, even without my intervention). The mines also remained a
hazard for rescue craft trying to leave the RHIB rescue base (a
converted Newport-class LST) and I lost one of these as well as a Staten
Island ferry tasked to help. Couldn’t really have done more about it.

The rescue effort is the main part of the scenario. First, you have to
fly Hercules aircraft over the distress beacons of the stricken ships to
get intel and drop rafts and markers. This is easy enough and scores a
whole VP per success. Choppers can then be sent to hover at minimum
altitude for five minutes over a lifeboat to effect a rescue. This
actually worked the first time I tried it and I was then able to fly the
survivors to Winthrop Hospital and drop them there by hovering over it.
Unfortunately, I was unable to repeat this success. The problem was that
the lifeboats are moving targets and the chopper can’t hover over them
without them sliding away from under it. After half-a-dozen unsuccessful
attempts, I gave-up.

You can otherwise use RHIBs (and Staten Island ferries in the case of
the QE2) to pick-up survivors by placing them over the distress beacons
for ten minutes. This worked reasonably well, but most boats actually
got to the evacuation stations under their own steam (which scores the
same). Not all lifeboats are marked and I only found out that the tanker
African Gem had been hit when her invisible boat reached safety!.
Although the QE2 sinking costs you 200VP, you are compensated by a
steady stream of 5VP awards for rescues if any RHIBS get to the area.

Another regular source of VP was a bogus rescue of the crew of the
cutter Dallas. Though she was just fine, the messages were convinced
she’d been sunk and her captain killed, urging me to send a couple of
choppers. Even though I took no action, I kept getting 5VP every 15
minutes or so. Shrugs.

Meanwhile, there were numerous ‘terrorist’ attacks ashore. While this
was mainly for scenario ‘feel’, some hostiles were detected along the
waterfront. A roving unit of US mechanised infantry were used to
sort-out one bunch and some suspicious trucks were shot-up successfully
by low-flying fighters. None of this scored any points, but it was
retaliation.

The enemy also seemed to have chartered five Cessna and Piper Cherokee
light aircraft, whether for a preview of 9/11 or some other purpose I
never found-out. Somehow, these were flagged-up as Unfriendly and I took
a chance and engaged them with fighters and the Mahan’s SAMs. This
paid-off in a small way and they scored 3VP each. Later-on, I was told
to send F-16s to challenge civilian planes which were slow to obey a
general grounding order. This involved making close passes and hoping
for the best. One such ‘challenge’ earned a VP when the civvy admitted
flying with his radar off and being in ignorance of the start of WW3,
but I found no confirmed hostiles and held my fire. One plane landed at
Trenton and later took-off again, flying in a circle and returning
whence it had come, but I left it unharmed.

While distracted by all of this, I actually managed to find and kill two
Soviet subs (a Charlie SSGN and an Akula SSN) with my two
properly-equipped Orions. Spruance and Sides arrived off Norfolk partway
through, but never got near the action. The Akula took three torpedo
hits to sink and the Charlie two, but they scored 200 welcome VP. With
the various rescue and miscellaneous awards, this lifted the final score
to +43, but it was pretty meaningless really.

For the record, the US lost a cutter, 14 assorted civilian ships, a RHIB
and two lifeboats. The Soviets lost two subs, five civilian aircraft, an
AGI ship, a trawler, a RHIB, 11 irregular ground elements and six swept
mines.

If this all sounds a bit anarchic, it’s because it was. As part of the
Northern Fury storyline, it was atmospheric and interesting, but I’ll be
glad to get back to some conventional action next time at Jan Mayen
Island.
