**<span class="underline">Bosporus Front</span>**

The Bosporus Front is an ad-hoc formation based on the structure of the
Odessa Military District (MD) with the primary task of seizing and
holding the Bosporus and Dardanelles Straits (Turkish Straits) allowing
free and clear access to the Mediterranean Sea. As an element of the
High Command of the South Western Direction (TVD), Bosporus front will
be working closely with the Black Sea Fleet, primarily the amphibious
and small craft remaining in the Black Sea. Aviation support will come
from the 5<sup>th</sup> Air Army, 19<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Army and
Naval Aviation elements, about 1000 aircraft of all types; however these
aircraft will have many other tasks which will limit their commitment to
support this Front.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/bosporus/image1.png)

The primary task of this Front is to conduct a Coup-de-Main assault on
the Bosporus straits while laying the groundwork for follow on
operations to capture or control both sides of the Dardanelles, allowing
uncontested maritime access between the Black and Mediterranean Seas. A
key strategic objective of this operation is to knock Turkey out of the
war or at least isolate Anatolia (Asian Turkey) from Istanbul and access
to the straits and Sea of Marmara. This Front does not initially have
the combat power to invest the metropolis of Istanbul, nor is it likely
that it will be able to seize the Dardanelles quickly; therefore,
political and other efforts will be made to entice Turkey’s cooperation.
Should these actions fail to achieve the strategic objectives this Front
will largely disperse with the bulk of the forces being absorbed into
the Balkan Front and key elements such as the Naval Infantry (NI) and
airborne forces being re-tasked to other priorities.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/bosporus/image2.jpg)

**<span class="underline">Coup-de-Main</span>**: Initially under the
direct control of the Front HQ, the 98<sup>th</sup> Gds Airborne
Division supported by the 810<sup>th</sup> NI Brigade and the
38<sup>th</sup> Air Landing Brigade will seize a beachhead on either
side of the northern mouth of the Bosporus Straits. A critically
important element is the rapid deployment of the Bulgarian
16<sup>th</sup> Motor Rifle Division (MRD) from its garrison and
exercise areas South East of Brugas Bulgaria; this formation will be
operating independent of national control for several hours as the
Commander and key staff as well as some Soviet advisors are the only
people in Bulgaria who know the attack is occurring.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/bosporus/image3.jpg)

**<span class="underline">Link up Force</span>**: The 32<sup>nd</sup>
(Crimea) Army Corps will use rail transport from Odesa and Chisinau to
arrive at Burgas with the first elements detraining within 24 hours of
operations commencing, and the bulk of the force moving east into Turkey
within 96 hours. Elements of 55<sup>th</sup> Artillery Division, the
9<sup>th</sup> Missile Brigade and most of 46<sup>th</sup> Anti-Aircraft
Missile Brigade will join this force. The main task is to drive South
Eastward into European Turkey to link up with the ‘Coup-de-Main’ forces
securing the bridgehead. The lead element will be the 16<sup>th</sup>
Bulgarian MRD which will follow the northern coast and be the main
effort for the link up. The 126<sup>th</sup> MRD has a newly equipped
battalion of very modern T-80 tanks and will follow after detraining and
proceed along the E-87 to an initial objective along the E-80 and
finally the 157<sup>th</sup> MRD will then proceed to the final
objective of seizing the Gallipoli Peninsula within 96-120 hours. At the
earliest opportunity, 98<sup>th</sup> Guards Airborne Division and
810<sup>th</sup> NI Brigade will be released to reconstitute and be
assigned to other tasks. 38<sup>th</sup> Air Lading Brigade will remain
a part of the Bosporus Front. Key formations in the Crimea Corps are:

  - 16<sup>th</sup> Bulgarian MRD (T-62, T-55, BTR-60, MTLB, BTR-50)

  - 126<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-80, T-64, BMP-2, BTR-70)

  - 127<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-72, BMP-1/2, BTR-60)

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/bosporus/image4.jpg)

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/bosporus/image5.png)

**<span class="underline">Follow on Force</span>**: 14<sup>th</sup>
Guards Combined Arms Army (CAA) began mobilizing in the week before the
war and its lead formation; 59<sup>th</sup> Guards MRD will follow
32<sup>nd</sup> Army Corps immediately rail space is available. The four
other MRDs in this army lack adequate offensive combat power and are
tasked with securing the Bosporus and Dardanelles, releasing other
forces to reconstitute and carry on offensive action. There is no
intention of conducting combat operations through the city of Istanbul,
should diplomatic efforts fail to ensure free passage through that city
this force will be tasked with securing the east and west banks of the
Bosporus and key crossing sites; the 750 guns and rockets of
55<sup>th</sup> and 71<sup>st</sup> Artillery Divisions as well as the
various heavy artillery and rocket formations will be used to assist
this operation. Key formations in 14<sup>th</sup> Guards CAA are:

  - 59<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-64, BMP-1, BTR-60, MTLB)

  - 86<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-64, T-55, BMP-2, BTR-70, BTR-50)

  - 158<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-55, Truck mounted infantry)

  - 159<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-55, Truck mounted infantry)

  - 180<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-64, T-55, BMP-1, BTR-70)

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/bosporus/image6.jpg)

**<span class="underline">Front Reserve</span>**: In addition to the
71<sup>st</sup> Artillery Division which will likely be assigned to
14<sup>th</sup> Gds CAA the main element of flexibility for the Front
Commander is the 28<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD. Although categorized as a
status ‘C’ division, it has a full suite of equipment (214x T-64A/B,
\~220x BTR-70, \~150x BMP-2, 98 mobile artillery pieces etc), however it
is normally only at 40% manning. The division was mobilized a week
before conflict and with high priority is fully staffed and undergoing
training by the middle of February 1994. The intention is to deliver
this division by sea to ports within the bridgehead beginning February
18<sup>th</sup> if possible; this will give significant punch to the
landed force.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/bosporus/image7.jpg)
