**French Naval Aviation**

The state of French Naval Aviation (Aviation Navale) in 1994 was quite
desperate. The long awaited Rafale fighter was delayed once again, now
over 20 (and eventually 25) years in development. This was only
mitigated by the delays in building the new Aircraft Carrier ‘Charles De
Gaulle’ which had finally been ordered in 1986, many years after it was
needed, and was due to be launched later in 1994 (it would not be
commissioned until 2001).

The aircraft available for the two existing aircraft carriers and one
helicopter carrier were suffering from both material and doctrinal
obsolescence.

**F-8P (FN) Crusader**

As the American Navy was adopting the F-4 Phantom as its air superiority
fighter, it was proven to be to large for the French aircraft carriers
Clemenceau and Foch. Therefore, the last F-8’s coming off the production
line were purchased, modified to fire the French Air to Air, R.530
missile, and adopted to provide air superiority to the French Fleet. 42
were purchased and constantly upgraded until, by 1998 only 17 underwent
a final life extension program. They operated in two Squadrons
(*Flotille*) 12 & 14, each of 8 aircraft. *Flotille* 12 is conducting
trials with USN F/A-18A at the start of the Northern Fury Campaign.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image1.jpg" style="width:5.79167in;height:3.85036in" alt="A group of people standing around a fighter jet on a runway Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

**Super Étendard IVM**

A total of 71 Super Étendards operated in Aviation Navale as the primary
strike fighter in four squadrons, three operational and one training
(11F, 13F, 15F, 17F). The normal complement in a carrier air wing was
16. Historically these started to retire in 1991 but they have been kept
in service for Northern Fury.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image2.jpg" style="width:5.875in;height:3.85704in" alt="A picture containing ground, outdoor, plane, aircraft Description automatically generated" />

**Étendard IVP**

The reconnaissance version of the original Étendard IV, the 22 examples
were modernized between 89 and 94 and would historically outlast the
‘Super’ versions by two decades. A standard air group has 4 of these on
board. They operate from three Squadrons (16F, 18F, 20F).

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image3.jpeg" style="width:4.38542in;height:2.97643in" alt="A picture containing outdoor, transport, airplane, aircraft Description automatically generated" />

**BR.1050 Alizé**

Making the rest of the air group look modern was the Breguet Alizé! An
ASW aircraft developed in the 1950’s. Although modernized in the 1980’s
and again in the early 1990’s (which about half of the feet have
undergone) improved the sensors somewhat, the final modernization
removed all weapons to allow room for a better radar and reduce the
weight load on the wings. Several squadrons operated these aircraft,
initially numbered in the 1-10F range but as the weapons were removed
and they became maritime patrol only they switched to the 21-30F range.
Normal complement in and air group was eight.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image4.jpeg" style="width:5.41667in;height:3.55498in" alt="A helicopter flying in the sky Description automatically generated with low confidence" />

**BR.1150 Atlantic 1 & 2**

The Atlantic is a shore based long range maritime patrol aircraft (MPA).
These aircraft operate in the same role as the American P-3 and the
British Nimrod, and by all accounts were equally capable in many
respects. There were 40 **Atlantic 1’s** delivered in the 60’s and 28 of
these were upgraded to **Atlantic 2’s**, with a much more capable sensor
platform in the 80’s. The 58 airframes remaining in 1994 operate in
seven squadrons of mixed versions.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image5.jpg" style="width:5.23958in;height:3.47559in" alt="A white airplane in the sky Description automatically generated with low confidence" />

**Falcon 200 Maritime Patrol, 50 ECM**

Five of these converted executive jets are used for maritime patrol
around French possessions in the Pacific Ocean. A similar number of
Falcon 50 ECM variants are operating out of continental France.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image6.jpg" style="width:4.33333in;height:3.25in" alt="A picture containing plane, outdoor, sky, airplane Description automatically generated" />

**Naval Aviation**:

The French Navy has a wide range of rotary wing craft conducting various
tasks. The primary ship board ASW helicopter is the **Lynx Mk.4(FN).**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image7.jpg" style="width:4.23958in;height:2.58542in" alt="A helicopter on a runway Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

Additionally, for carrier based ASW and to sanitize of the exit routs
for the SSBNs the **SA.321G Super Frelon** is used.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image8.jpeg" style="width:4.96875in;height:3.34754in" alt="A helicopter taking off Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

Ship board Search and Rescue (SAR) is conducted by the **SA.365F Dauphin
2.**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\navy\naval-aviation\image9.jpg" style="width:5.38542in;height:3.03412in" alt="A helicopter in the air Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />
