**Northern Fury â€“ Charge of the Light Bde**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Nov 2017</u>**

So, here we go with Charge of the Light Brigade, bearing the famous
ominous poem in mind... ("Charge for the guns!", he said: Into the
Valley of Death rode the six hundred.)

**THE SITUATION**

I've been assigned the task of reducing the two Russian-held airfields
(Orland and Vaernes) in the Trondheim area, by naval bombardment and
aerial attack, as well as hunting mines in the Orland approaches, and
inserting some special forces in the Orland area. The Russians are
naturally all over the Trondheim area, where intelligence reports
indicate one or two SA-20 batteries, and they also have two more
southerly airfields at Sandane and Sogndal. I've been told to expect
small enemy ships and subs, but their major naval vessels are busy
elsewhere.

On land I have four Norwegian airbases. They have some good units, but a
lot of them are lesser aircraft armed with dumb ordnance (cluster bombs
and iron bombs). I have several bases in the Shetlands with Marine F-18s
and their tankers, although the F-18s are loaded with dumb ordnance
again. Down in England I've got a real mix of everything in Lossiemouth
(some air-to-air, some dumb bombs, some ARMs), a big pack of Phantoms
with iron bombs and napalm in the south, and assorted long range support
elements (AEW, Tankers, MPA, ELINT).

My naval forces are somewhat spread out. I've got two British carriers,
each with one long-range missile ship in attendance, and a loose screen
of three ASW ships far out in front of them. Closer to the coast I have
a group of four British ships (two long range Sea Dart ships, and two
close range Sea Wolf ships) forming up for bombardment duties, and even
closer in I've got another spread out NATO group providing screening.
I've also got a flotilla of minesweepers and two patrol boat escorts
approaching Orland from the south, coming through the Hitra Island
channel.

**THE PLAN**

Looking things over, I'm really concerned by the situation out at sea.
My main task groups are in widely dispersed formations that would be
useful for hunting submarines out in the open Atlantic but leave the
individual ships essentially on their own in the event of air attack,
and I'm supposed to be snuggling up to multiple active airbases. The two
task groups are ordered to turn and close on each other at high speed in
order to concentrate their SAM umbrella, before proceeding to the coast
for bombardment duties. The carriers will also close up, following each
other in trail behind a more concentrated ASW screen, in the hope that a
narrow densely swept lane will be more secure from submarines than
advancing on a broad weak front. My minesweeping flotilla will split in
two, one group heading around the sea coast of Hitra Island, and the
other proceeding along the channel. Since they are so weakly defended
I'm hoping this will preserved at least a few of them in the event of
attack.

My initial air attack will send all stand-off attackers (i.e., those
with HARMs, Mavericks, and GBUs) from the Norwegian airbases to find and
engage the SA-20s and other SAMs expected in the Trondheim area,
escorted by as many good fighters as can be mustered. They probably
won't achieve conclusive results, but will hopefully attrite the
fighters and air defences, and force the expenditure of a large number
of the valuable SA-20 missiles.

The southern Sogndal and Sandane airports will not be attacked directly,
with the exception of a small HARM attack on the long-range search radar
at Sogndal. A large number of my aircraft are set up for conventional
bombing, and they could easily reach these targets, but previous
engagements have taught me that going into the Russian low-altitude
air-defence envelope is likely to cause horrific losses, even when
terrain masking. Therefore, the western Jaguars and F-5s are sent along
the coast to hunt for Russian patrol boats operating in the area, but
the eastern ones are kept on ready reserve in the event that Russian
ground forces make a sudden surge.

My English bases will send their F-4 and Tornado fighters to patrol near
Sogndal and Sandane, in order to deal with pop-up threats there after my
main Norwegian force has passed by. Jaguars and Buccaneers with dumb
bombs will join the coastal hunt for Russian boats (staying well away
from the airbase defences), and the F-15s and Tornados with ALARMs will
head to the Orland/Trondheim area to try and give some cover to my
ships, and to try and deal with peripheral air defences revealed by the
first attack.

The big pile of F-18s and F-4s in England are armed with dumb bombs,
which is a recipe for disaster. These are all ordered to stand down and
re-arm with guided weapons: GBUs on the F-4s, and HARMs on the F-18s.
Because of this stand-down they will only be able to participate in one
attack during our allotted window, but it should be much more effective
and survivable. These planes, along with the re-armed Norwegians (those
who survived) will make a concentrated dawn attack on Orland and
Vaernes. This will be our only attack on the airbases during our
allotted mission time, so it will have to work. I expect to be able to
rough up one airbase, but I'm not sure if we'll be able to manage both
of them.

**THE ACTUAL**

As the scenario starts my ELINT and E-3 aircraft report contacts with
numerous active vessels in the Trondheim area (mostly ASW craft), and
multiple ships tucked away in various fjords. The ones in the fjords are
not moving, not emitting, and I don't know what they are yet. I don't
want to waste missiles on what might simply be fishing boats, so no
attacks are made yet.

The first action begins at sea, when the Russians spot the ASW
helicopters around the British ships, and start making aggressive runs
towards them. If I don't engage, they'll slaughter my helicopters, and
when they drop below the clouds to finish them off they'll spot my
ships. If I do engage my radar emissions will identify my fleet anyway.
I try and split the difference. While my helicopters flee for the safety
of their ships at wavetop altitude (all ASW patrols are cancelled for
the moment) only the Birmingham lights up and starts engaging Mig-31s
with its long range Sea Dart (which proves quite effective). Moments
later I start getting ESM hits from over-the horizon targeting radars on
some of the boat contacts. They're not fishing boats. They're Tarantuls,
and their supersonic sea-skimming anti-shipping missiles are on the way
in.

A desperate fight breaks out around the merging task groups. As the
ships race towards each other, more and more missiles pour in. At first
there are only a few, and the Harriers can shoot them down, but then the
Harriers run out of missiles or have to flee from Su-27s and Mig-31s,
and I have to light up additional ships to defend. Each new ship that
lights up brings more missiles in return, and then I have to light up
even more, in a horrible progression that gets worse and worse. As this
goes on the Russians throw in a Mig-27 attack, and a heavy sweep of
Su-27s from the north. My missile stockpile is dropping sharply, and I
don't dare spend missiles on the passing enemy fighters, which sweep by
and slaughter the AEW Sea King as it was running desperately for the
carriers. My Harriers are all out of missiles and fleeing themselves, so
they can't be of any help, and my support aircraft have to fall back
too, as some of the fighters press past the ASW pickets, until the
carrier escorts themselves are engaging with Sea Dart. (Fortunately, I
don't need to light up the carriers themselves, so hopefully those
haven't been ID-ed yet.)

Unfortunately, I'm not well placed to retaliate. Harpoons are outranged
by SS-N-22s, and since my closest task group is racing out to sea to
join its comrade it is out of range of the shore and can't shoot back.
The two escorts with the minesweepers are in range, and they do open
fire, but many of their missiles are shot down by enemy fighters. The
few that do arrive find their targets have moved, and they wander off
uselessly along the fjords and into the hills. The main benefit is that
a number of planes spend their time chasing down these missiles, which
helps ease the pressure on my task groups. It's not until some of my
attack planes arrive later on that I'm able to bomb a few of the patrol
boats, unfortunately long after they've fired their missiles.

By the time the two task groups have merged in tight formation, and the
patrol boat missile attack has tapered off, my SAM stockpiles are
dangerously low. All my ships (with the exception of one of the older
Seawolf ships) are down to single digit quantities, many are at five or
less, and some are completely out. The task group tightens up and moves
in, but if there are more missile attacks (particularly from the north,
where I have little recce, and am blind) then I will probably be forced
to pull back and abandon the bombardment plan. A couple of shore based
missile batteries could do significant damage at this point. For the
moment, my ships press on. (The main thing that has saved me so far is
geography. The missile boats were spread along a long coast, so their
missiles arrived over time, instead of being a concentrated salvo which
would have wrecked me.)

Over land, the situation is better. The surveillance radar at Sogndal
succumbs to close-range HARM shots from a pair of F-16s sneaking along a
valley, and the advancing fighters deal with a small number of Mig-23s
that come up to contest the situation. As the advance continues, my
fighters start engaging Russian fighters from the Trondheim area,
gradually pushing them back. The SA-20 in the Trondheim area starts
interfering, forcing my planes down into the valleys to hide, which
hampers my ability to fight, but gives me a valuable indicator of where
it is located. (Very close to an SBS dropoff zone!) A wave of fresh
Mig-23s out of Orland drives off my Jaguars and F-5s, which had been
harassing the Russian missile boats, before the last of my fighters
force them away in turn, and for a moment there are only a few enemy
planes on my radar.

Seizing the lull in the enemy's air activity, my attackers head for the
ground and close in towards the SA-20, which seems to be pausing
(possibly reloading) for the moment. That's when an SA-8 lights up in my
path, along with a second SA-20 across the water from Trondheim, and
then the first SA-20 opens fire again. I salvo my GBUs and most of my
HARMs at the closer SA-20, only to see half of the HARMs change course
and go streaking towards the further battery, while Weasels and F-16s
try to deal with the SA-8s (plural, dammit) using Mavericks. Two SA-11s
reveal themselves to get into the fight too. The one off to the NNW
isn't such a big deal, but the one that opens up at my 5 o'clock
definitely gets my attention, as it wrecks a pair of my valuable F-15Es
who had to climb to release their GBUs. When the confusion finally ends,
and the survivors are on the deck and headed for home again, the score
is 1 SA-20 and 2 SA-8 batteries destroyed, and one SA-20 battery (the
far one) seriously damaged and not emitting. This is much better than I
had anticipated, and I am hopeful about the upcoming dawn strike.
However, it completely reinforces my decision to stay out of the
low-altitude air defence environment with conventional ordnance. If I'd
gone in with iron bombs this would have been a disaster.

As the attackers proceed home the Soviets sortie another 8 planes from
Orland (4 Flankers, 4 Floggers), and I have to divert my English F-15s
to deal with them. The pair of EA-6s lurking behind the F-15s lets them
engage safely without being fired upon first, but they use up all their
missiles in the process, so they won't be able to cover my ships or
guard the Tornados as they make Alarm attacks. Then another four
Floggers sortie from each of the southern airbases as my strike is
returning, but fortunately the F-4s and Tornados on patrol there are
able to deal with them before they get too far.

At the moment there are no Russian fighters aloft over the sea, and some
of my helicopters are headed out at wavetop level to check out a
convergence zone Goblin contact to the north. Hopefully there'll be no
interference, otherwise they'll be cut down in short order.

**NEXT...**

Based on what I've seen so far, my probable course of action is as
follows.

Land based stand-off attackers will recover and re-arm, preparatory to
the dawn strike. Land based fighters will recover and re-arm. Small
patrols will be kept up, but no major sorties until dawn, unless there
is a Soviet surge. Land based attack planes with conventional ordnance
will continue to harass outlying Russian patrol boats. I'll try a
reconnaissance of the Orland / Vaernes area with an IR equipped F-16,
but the odds of success are low.

Task Group Virginia (all my surface ships not directly with the
carriers) will advance on the coast in tight formation to bombard
Orland, first making Harpoon attacks on the numerous patrol craft in the
Orland area in an attempt to clear them out before the minesweepers
arrive. (If they don't, the sweepers will be defenceless, and easily
destroyed.) Carrier based fighters (Harriers) will cover the task group
as best they can, bearing in mind that Harriers play poorly with
supersonic fighters. If they're challenged by any significant force they
will lose.

Minesweepers will clear channel for the bombardment route (assuming the
patrol boats in the area are taken care of), allowing TG Virginia to
bombard Orland and then retire. The helicopter insertion of special
forces will proceed during this time, assuming I can clear the air
defences off the landing zone.

Tankers will preposition for the dawn strike. The dawn strike will
concentrate on Orland (primary) and Vaernes (secondary) airfields,
targeting runways with GBUs.

Lets see what happens!

The Charge of the Light Brigade continues!

As the planes from the evening attack return to base, air-to-air
skirmishing continues in the north near Orland, and my retiring fighters
and newly arriving Harriers continue to hold their own. A Tornado strike
with ALARM manages to severely damage another SA-11 south of Orland, as
well as getting a look at other air defences in the area, before
retiring in good order.

The advancing task group starts engaging the patrol boats in the Orland
area with Harpoons, and it takes a fair bit of pounding to get rid of
them, because they're close up against the Orland air defences, which
manage to shoot down a good number of the incoming missiles. This is an
expensive way to kill patrol boats, but it serves a double task of
depleting the Orland air defences, which will be helpful when the dawn
raid comes. Two Tarantuls coming down from the north are also dealt with
in a similar way.

My decision to split the minesweepers into two groups turns out well -
for the Russians. A ship in the outer coastal group suddenly vanishes in
a thundering underwater explosion, with no sign of where it came from.
Torpedo! The others start to run, but they have no idea which direction
the attack came from, and a second ship explodes some minutes later. The
others keep running blindly, certain they're about to die, but what
actually happens is that the sub exhausts its batteries trying to catch
up, and then sticks up its snorkel and gets detected on radar. ASW
helicopters hurry in from the task group, keeping as low as possible,
and sink the sub. Then, as they are turning to proof the path of the
surviving minesweepers, they get a MAD hit on a second sub in the same
area, and sink that too. Full of their success, they then proceed to lay
sonobuoys in the expected path of the task group, and that's when the
Mig-31s launch out of Orland only a few miles away. The Harriers try to
interfere, but the result is predictable. Total score is two enemy subs
and one Mig destroyed, at the cost of two minesweepers and two ASW
helicopters. Let's call it a tie.

The southern minesweeper group coming through the channel doesn't have
it easy either. The lead sweeper runs over a rising mine without
detecting it, and is destroyed. Shortly afterwards the patrol boat
escort detects a torpedo in the water, and turns to flee, but the
torpedo hunts down and strikes one of the minesweeping ROVs instead.
Turning to investigate, the patrol boat finds no sub, and another
attempt by a brave ASW helicopter finds nothing before it is forced to
flee from more fighters coming out of Orland. I'm not certain this was a
sub at all, and it may have been the Soviet version of the CAPTOR mine.

The oncoming fighters from Orland cause another fighter engagement, this
time with Mig-23s, and the Harriers do well against these, taking down
four for no losses. I can't do this indefinitely, because the carriers
are running out of AMRAAMs now, and I'm starting to load Sidewinders
only. One thing which is helping is the oncoming task group, which has
all its radars and jammers on at full power, allowing the Harriers to
hide in the jamming cloud while the enemy's SARH missiles break lock. Of
course, this means I've got a huge electronic 'here I am' signature
hanging over the task group, but that's okay because my mission is to
have the Russians firmly focused on our presence. I have also ordered
the task group to turn on their lights, fire flares, and play Celine
Dion really loud over the speakers. If that doesn't provoke a Russian
reaction nothing will.

Watching the crawling progress of the minesweepers, who have so far only
succeeded in finding mines by hitting them, I am very concerned about
getting the task group safely into the bombardment zone through the
minefield. I don't think I'll have the time to do it. However, there may
be another way in. I can head east to the coast north of Orland, and
then south along the coast to the area where the enemy patrol boats were
operating. Presumably they weren't operating in a minefield (unless it's
set for deep draft only), so I think it should be safe. The leading
frigate will be very nervous. This will put me very close to the coast,
so hopefully there aren't any tanks laagered on the beach. Perhaps I'll
turn off the music as I sneak by.

In other news, SOF insertion has proceeded successfully, and the
helicopters are returning to the task group. F-16 recce patrols with IR
pods have tried to get a better look into the Vaernes area, but are
getting shot at by SAMs and have to keep ducking away into the valleys,
so they have little new information (although they did manage to strafe
a radar). More to follow as the situation develops.

EDIT: I'm starting to get really nervous about Bodo and Vaernes. I had a
flock of Su-27s come from the direction of Bodo early on, but what else
is up there? Is a flight of Su-24's about to descend on my task group as
it reaches the coast? And why haven't I seen anything else from Vaernes
lately? I'm pretty sure Mig-29s and Su-27s are based there, but they've
been quiet of late. Suddenly, my task group looks like it's in a very
precarious situation (especially now that my Harrier CAP is depleted).
I'm going to send up a tanker and a flight of Eagles to act as a long
night-guard. I wanted them for the dawn raid, but I think they'd better
get up there now.

EDIT 2: Just shot down an Su-24 jammer which had been orbiting E of
Vaernes. It's replacement lifted off from Bodo. There're definitely
Su-24s up there. Now I really want those Eagles over the TG.

The mission is complete, and units are currently returning to base.

The naval bombardment worked well, and no mines were encountered on the
way through the Russian patrol boat area (although the area is infested
with marine life and other false targets). The task group moved into
line ahead with frigates leading (to limit the chance of mine strikes),
and proceeded to blast away like ships of the line, destroying air
defence units and exposed aircraft, and shelling the hangars. Having
completed the shelling the task group turned about in good Jutland
fashion and retraced its exact route out towards the carriers, escorting
the surviving minesweepers that it picked up on the way out.

One more snorkelling sub was spotted far to the north by radar, and a
pair of ASW helicopters dealt with it without difficulty.

With Orland neutralized as a defensive unit, the dawn strike was able to
concentrate on Vaernes instead. No Russian aircraft were launched to
defend the base. A large number of my ARM-carrying planes were able to
overwhelm the defences, and then GBUs were used to systematically
destroy the runways and taxiways and other high value targets like the
hangars. After that Jaguars, Harriers, and Buccaneers were able to work
over the defenceless airfields with 1,000 lb bombs.

The feared strike from Bodo never materialized, and the exhausted task
group can now head home to rest and restock.

This was an interesting scenario with many different things to do.
Thanks for putting it together for us. It has certainly taught me that I
don't like minefields, and clearing a modern minefield is something that
can't be done easily on the fly. Very slow, very methodical...
