**Northern Fury 44, Into the Bastion**

31 March 94 0200 Zulu, 0400 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf44\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:5.12292in" alt="Seawolf: The &amp;#39;Secret&amp;#39; Submarines the U.S. Navy Doesn&amp;#39;t Want You to Know About | The National Interest" />

Six weeks into World War Three and the Warsaw Pact has been halted on
all fronts, but before any serious NATO offensive takes place a question
must be resolved. The Nuclear question.

While NATO leaders are confident that they have halted the Soviet
advance, much hard fighting lies ahead if the alliance is to liberate
territory now in the hands of the Soviets. Including the capital cities
of two NATO members. Right now, the Norwegian front appears to present
the best opportunity to rapidly reclaim territory without incurring
heavy losses. Of course, the ever-present concern is that the Soviets
may resort to nuclear weapons if they feel too hard pressed. Therefor,
NATO needs to send them a message that such escalation is folly.

Many Soviet leaders, however, believe that special weapons are like any
other weapons – made to be used if needed. The one significant holdout
on the Soviet side however is the President, and he holds the final
decision.

In this scenario the US decides that it should send a clear and
unmistakable message to the Soviet President, to make sure he doesn’t
change his mind.

**This scenario is playable by either NATO or the WP**:

**Into the Bastion**, is a small, submarine focused scenario with the
most advanced submarines in the 1994 world pitted against each other.

As NATO you will take two ***Seawolf*** class SSNs into the Soviet
Barents Sea Bastion, eliminate any Soviet SSNs and identify their SSBNs
without being detected. The tracking data you obtain will find its way
into President Medvedev’s hands as a signal of what the US could do -
but didn’t.

As the WP player you have two ***Typhoon*** class SSBNs and their
escorts. You expect the Americans to penetrate your bastion at some
point and you are ready to destroy them when they do. Keep your Boomers
hidden while you sink the intruders.

**<u>Northern Fury \#44</u>** is a scenario focused on the use of
submarines in a contested space. The US player needs to show both
aggression and restraint, killing a Soviet Boomer will undoubtably
unleash the nuclear monster as surely as launching missiles at Soviet
space. From the Soviet perspective, the SSBNs are the last line of
national survival, if they are lost – so is the war.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart4\nf44\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.56389in" alt="Russia&amp;#39;s Typhoon Mega Submarine is Over Fifteen Times the Size of a Regular Submersible Ship" />
