**Northern Fury 6 - Trondheim Express**

14 February 1994, 1800 Zulu, 1900 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf6\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.33333in;height:2.57292in" alt="Northern Fury" />

Day two of a new global war, and it has already gone badly. You are
commander of Allied Forces North, and the situation went from being bad
yesterday to disastrous this morning! You staff have focused on
re-grouping your surviving units and bringing in new reinforcements as
fast as possible. A major Soviet push this morning has forced your air
units South, effectively closing Bardufoss. Tromso, Evenes is still open
but barely. Your heavily depleted air units have scrambled back to Bodo
where 3 Norwegian and 1 Dutch F-16 Squadrons with the F-15s of the US
493<sup>rd</sup> FS are attempting to hold back hundreds of Soviet A/C.
Jamming continues to be heavy and very effective, you can also assume
that Soviet ELINT is picking up most transmissions. Both Banak and
Kirkens airfields were in operation against us this morning.

Your available aircraft are severely depleted, your pilots are tired,
your ground crews are exhausted, and your stock of AAW missiles is
draining rapidly. You grudgingly consider a further withdraw of forces
South to Orland and Vaernes.  The one bright spot is the arrival of a
British Jaguar and 2 USAF F-16 and Squadrons. The situation on land is
equally bad, an airmobile operation NE of Bardufoss this morning seized
the passes and dislocated the defenders there - Bardufoss will fall in
the next few hours, it is already under artillery fire. The Maritime
situation is improving marginally, the Norwegian Navy has put to sea and
STANAVFORLANT is moving to assist.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf6\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.55069in" alt="General Dynamic F-16 Fighting Falcon | Weaponsystems.net" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#6</u>** is closely linked with scenario 5 and is a
continuation of the same fight. New actors have entered the fray on the
NATO side in the form of the Standing Naval Force Atlantic
(STANAVFORLANT) and several aircraft squadrons.

Although the tough fight continues, NATO is finally getting the
resources it needs and the Soviets are reaching the end of their
effective range, at least until they can establish forward bases.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf6\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.68889in" alt="China&amp;#39;s (from Russia) Kilo-Class Submarines Can Sink Just About Anything | The National Interest" />
