![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/airforce/su27/image1.jpeg)

[**Su-27
‘Flanker’**](https://www.plane-encyclopedia.com/cold-war/su-27/)

The Flanker is the preeminent air superiority fighter in the Soviet
inventory. Introduced in 1985 and meant to be the counter to the US F-15
Eagle the Flanker became a formidable opponent to NATO planners and
changed the paradigm in the realm of air to air warfare. Before the
Su-27 the Soviets had always seemed to rely on quantity over quality,
but the Flanker added a significant degree of quality to the mix. Able
to maneuver as well or in some circumstances better than its western
counterparts the Flanker utilized weapons and sensors that rivalled
those of the west as well.

Historic production rates are difficult to pin down but much can be
found at this [site](https://www.milavia.net/aircraft/su-27/su-27.htm);
fielding began in 1984/85 and continued through the decade. We know that
most of the basic production models (Su-27S/P/SM were complete by the
time the Soviet Union broke up, estimates that about 500 aircraft were
fielded by 1990 with 367 in Europe; 138 ‘S’ variants with the Airforce
(VVS) having the ability to drop bombs; and 229 with the Air Defence
Force (PVO). We know, or believe, that production was reduced
significantly due to financial and logistic difficulties. We know that
much of the focus of production shifted to exports in the early 1990’s
and that was at a much lower rate than serial production in the late
1980’s.

The difficulty in Northern Fury is predicting what would have happened
in our situation, the Flanker was still in production and highly
regarded. In coming up with a number of aircraft available it is helpful
to remember that the Soviet Union had massive industrial and resource
capacity, 5000 MiG-23s were produced in 18 years for instance: 280 per
year. The older MiG-21 was almost twice that rate. There are many
imponderable variables to consider so the following assumptions help
considerably.

1.  Production would be maintained at the pre-1991 level throughout as a
    minimum.

2.  As it became clear that war would occur (late 1992), production
    would increase.

3.  Export sales would not be entertained except within the Warsaw Pact.

4.  There would be ongoing impetus to modernize.

**Production Rate**: If we accept that most of the base model aircraft
existed before 1991, approximately 500 aircraft were built between 1985
and 1990 or 100 per year. So as a baseline an additional 200 aircraft
will be available by the start of 1994.

Considering an increase due to an imminent war is much more speculative,
in theory you could triple output by putting on three shifts at the
factory instead of one, but that is unrealistic and does not consider
resources (human, financial and feeder parts) and would be a sure fire
tip off the west that you had something in mind. Perhaps a 40-50%
increase in production as a SWAG; so another 50 airframes.

In total then the Soviet Union will field about 750 Su-27S/P/SM by the
start of Northern Fury. These will be split about 30/70 between the PVO
(Air Defence Army) and VVS (Frontal Aviation) and equip front line
aviation Regiments.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/airforce/su27/image2.jpg)

**Export:** Historically 24 Su-27s (20x ‘SK’ or export versions of the
basic ‘S’ model, and 4 training versions ‘UBK’) were delivered to China
in 1992 and further deliveries were agreed to. In Northern Fury this
doesn’t happen, but 12 of these ‘SK’ versions were provided to
Czechoslovakia.

**Modernization, Modifications**: There are two derivatives of the Su-27
which concern us considering the timeframe: The Su-30 (Su-27PU),
improved strike variant based on the two-seat trainer; and the Su-33
(Su-27K) Naval variant. Both of these variants were already in
production, the Su-30 beginning in 1991 and the Su-33 in 1990, but both
were very slow to build and were caught up in the turbulent times of the
early 1990’s. Historically, 25x Su-30s and 24x Su-33s were built but it
is unclear when, at least 13x Su-33s were available in 1995, and 2x
Su-30s in 1992.

**The Su-30 (Su-27PU) Flanker-C**: In Northern Fury the Su-30s would
have been produced on a much more consistent bases so we’ll assume that
there are enough available to equip one Fighter-Bomber Aviation Regiment
of 41 aircraft (3x Squadrons of 12 each and 5 spare/command). They will
make up the 236<sup>th</sup> Fighter-Bomber Aviation Regiment (APIB), in
the 15<sup>th</sup> Air Army supporting the Leningrad and Baltic
Military Districts.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/airforce/su27/image3.jpg)

**Su-33 (Su-27K) Flanker-D**: Due to the deployment of a second aircraft
carrier, double the fighters are required, plus some spares to replace
combat losses. Each air wing has 24 aircraft, and 16 spares will be held
for training and combat replacement for a total of 66 aircraft.

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/airforce/su27/image4.jpg)
