**NORTH-WESTERN TVD**

In *Northern* Fury, the Soviet Plan BOYAR calls for a major emphasis on
the strategic flanks. As such, the Soviets reactivate the North Western
‘High Command in the Strategic direction’ (TVD), based on the HQ for
Leningrad Military District (MD). North-Western TVD’s main objective is
to invade Norway to knock that country out of the NATO alliance and
destabilize NATO’s northern flank. To accomplish this, the TVD has been
given significant land, naval and air forces. With the bulk of the Red
Banner Northern Fleet (less Strategic Forces), a reinforced
76<sup>th</sup> Air Army, coordination and tasking authority over
6<sup>th</sup> and 10<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Armies, as well as some
PVO forces within the Leningrad Military District, the North-Western TVD
is a powerful conglomeration on military strength, especially when
joined with the land forces of the re-formed KARELIAN FRONT.

Anticipating that NATO will react aggressively, the key aspect of Plan
BOYAR is to act swiftly and decisively in an effort to catch defenders
at a low ebb in readiness. Towards this end, the 2<sup>nd</sup> Special
Forces (Spetsnaz) Brigade and other GRU elements have been training for
months and began deploying weeks in advance of hostilities. The Spetsnaz
forces are nominally under the control of the KARELIAN FRONT, but in
reality their tasking comes directly from Moscow and the FRONT HQ staff
are informed of their presence when other land forces are in close
proximity – no earlier.

**<u>Red Banner Northern Fleet</u>**

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image1.jpeg" style="width:10.66667in;height:7.34375in" alt="C:\Users\BGauvin\Pictures\Web pages\Soviet\oscar_2_class_l7.jpg" />

Of the 400+ vessels in the Northern Fleet, about 350 are involved in
Plan BOYAR. The centerpiece of Soviet naval activity for this
operations, as always, is the submarine; their force includes 60+ SSNs
including over a dozen 3<sup>rd</sup> generation (*Sierra* (4), and
*Alpha* (4)) or 4<sup>th</sup> generation (*Akula* (6)), 30+ SSGNs
including eight of the giant and deadly *Oscar-*class, and 60+ SSKs,
about half of which are modern *Tango* or *Kilo* class boats. A second
key component is the Amphibious forces, which will operate in the
Norwegian Sea. Although small by western standards, their purpose is to
deliver and resupply two Naval Infantry (NI) Brigades. Supporting the
submarine surge and amphibious operations are powerful surface forces
including two *Kuznetzov*-class aircraft carriers, two *Kiev*-class
aviation cruisers, two *Kirov-*class battlecruisers, two *Slava*-class
air defence cruisers and about 50 other ocean-going warships. The
primary purpose of the surface elements is to disrupt NATO surface and
ASW forces, allowing the submarine and amphibious elements to achieve
their missions. Over 100 coastal and fast attack craft will operate
along the Norwegian coast in conjunction with the surface and amphibious
forces while protecting the maritime flank of the KARELIAN FRONT.
Intelligence gathering and support ships will be placed throughout the
region, particularly the North Atlantic to monitor NATO activity and
support naval and air force targeting efforts. Finally, maritime air
forces will support all activities with intelligence gathering,
disruption, surveillance and strike activities.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image2.jpeg" style="width:10in;height:6.26042in" alt="C:\Users\BGauvin\Pictures\Web pages\Soviet\Kirov class.jpg" />

**<u>Air Forces Supporting North-Western TVD</u>**

All told, there are about 1,500 aircraft under the direct or indirect
control of North-Western TVD. The coordinating authority is the
76<sup>th</sup> Air Army of the VVS and the main task is to support the
KARELIAN FRONT’s operation with a secondary task of supporting the Red
Banner Northern Fleet’s mission.

**76<sup>th</sup> Air Army**: Normally comprising of over 400 combat
aircraft this formation will increase by about 50% in the few days prior
to operations commencing and more than double in size a few days later.
These forces, when fully assembled will comprise of:

-   149<sup>th</sup> Bomber Aviation Division: \~70x Su-24

-   122<sup>nd</sup> Fighter Aviation Division: \~120x Su-27

-   246<sup>th</sup> Fighter Aviation Division (Reinforced with
    32<sup>nd</sup> Guards Fighter Regiment): \~135x MiG-23MLD

-   131<sup>st</sup> Fighter Aviation Division (Reinforcing with an
    additional Fighter Regiment, the 73<sup>rd</sup> Guards): 31x
    MiG-29M, 41x Su-27, 45x MiG-23MLD

-   125<sup>th</sup> Fighter Bomber Division (Reinforcing): 32x MiG-27,
    \~70x Su-17M4

-   259<sup>th</sup> Mixed Assault Division (Reinforcing, newly formed
    with 372<sup>nd</sup> Independent Assault Regiment and four rotary
    wing regiments): 24x Su-25, 160x Mi-8, 80x Mi-24, 12x Mi-26, 12x
    Mi-6, 48x Mi-2)

-   Army forces including: 50x Su-24, \~60x Su-17M3/M3R and about two
    dozen specialized MiG-25 and other aircraft.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image3.jpeg" style="width:13.125in;height:7.94792in" alt="Related image" />

**Air Arm of The Red Banner Northern Fleet:** With a primary focus on
supporting the fleet, this force operates almost 700 aircraft including
about 220 onboard ships. The land based forces include 160 Long Range
Aviation Bombers or Reconnaissance aircraft, and 140 shore based ASW
platforms, mostly long range. There are also a large number of support
and transport airframes as well as a regiment of Su-24 medium bombers
and many backup and training aircraft for the aircraft carriers
(MiG-29K, Su-25, Yak-38 & 141) which could be pushed into combat if
required.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image4.jpeg" style="width:11.11458in;height:7.375in" alt="C:\Users\BGauvin\Pictures\Web pages\Soviet\Russian aircraft carrier Admiral Kuznetsov Admiral Flota Sovetskovo Soyuza Kuznetsov Sukhoi Su-33 Flanker-D MiG-29K Varyag Su-27K j-15 russian navy plan (6).jpg" />

**6<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Army (PVO)**: This formation is not under
direct control of North-Western TVD but is cooperating and can receive
tasks in support of the operation. The primary responsibility of this
formation is to provide air defence over Karelia and the Kola Peninsula;
for Plan BOYAR this has been extended to include Northern Norway as far
west as Narvik. To accomplish this task 6<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Army
operates two Air Defence Corps (27<sup>th</sup> and 54<sup>th</sup>),
and the 14<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Division with about 250 fighters
(\~120x MiG-23MLD, 36x Su-27, 31x MiG-31, \~40 MiG-25 and 40 ancient
Su-15) as well as 22 SAM Brigades or Regiments. Four Beriev A-50
Mainstay Airborne Early Warning and Control aircraft are assigned to the
formation and training has been conducted with controlling aircraft from
the 76<sup>th</sup> Air Army as well.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image5.jpeg" style="width:10.69792in;height:4.92842in" alt="Image result for a-50 mainstay" />

**10<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Army (PVO)**: While the 6<sup>th</sup> Air
Defence Army looks west and north-west, the 10<sup>th</sup> looks
north-west and north, there is some integration in the area of the Kola
peninsula, particularly as about 180 aircraft and several SAM brigades
are stationed in the Murmansk area including \~80x MiG-25, \~60x MiG-31
and \~40x Su-27. Additionally, three Beriev A-50 Mainstay are operating
with this Army but they are focused towards the north.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image6.jpg" style="width:4.26667in;height:2.66667in" />

**18<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Corps (PVO)**: This formation is part of
Leningrad Military District (MD) and will likely deploy a regiment to
reinforce 6<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Army in the first week of the war,
likely the 180<sup>th</sup> Guards Fighter Regiment with MiG-31M/SM,
although if reinforced from other areas the 177<sup>th</sup> Fighter
Regiment with MiG-23MLDs could also deploy forward.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image7.png" style="width:11.70833in;height:3.52083in" />

**<u>KARELIAN FRONT</u>**

In addition to the air and naval forces based on and around the Kola
Peninsula, the major Army formation under North-Western TVD’s command is
the KARELIAN FRONT, a formation last used in the Second World War. The
KARELIAN FRONT is responsible for controlling all land forces in
North-Western TVD and in addition to security of the Leningrad MD has
the task of seizing Norway and other areas.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image8.png" style="width:6.864in;height:5.96867in" />

In a retrospectively obvious attempt at disinformation and deflection,
the 6<sup>th</sup> Combined Arms Army (CAA) was significantly weakened
in the months leading up to the start of hostilities while some
shuffling occurred in the other formations. The lead formation of the
Front became the 26<sup>th</sup> Army Corps, now referred to by the
historical name **Archangel Corps**.

-   **Archangel Corps (26<sup>th</sup> Army Corps)**, significantly
    reinforced from its pre-coup structure is responsible for seizing
    Norway. In the year preceding hostilities, the 115<sup>th</sup>
    Mobilization Motor Rifle Division (MRD) was shifted to the
    30<sup>th</sup> Guards Army Corps (Vyborg Corps) in exchange for the
    full strength 45<sup>th</sup> Guards and 11<sup>th</sup> MRDs.
    Additionally, the 17<sup>th</sup> Tank Brigade which was formally
    known as the 6<sup>th</sup> Independent Guards ‘Berlin’ Motor Rifle
    Brigade, was added.

    -   45<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80, BMP-2, BTR-70/80)

    -   69<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-64/72, BMP-2, BTR-70/80)

    -   77<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80, MTLB)

    -   111<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-72, MTLB, BTR-60/70)

    -   17<sup>th</sup> Tank Brigade (T-72/64, BMP-3, BTR-80)

-   **Vyborg Corps (30<sup>th</sup> Guards Army Corps)**, remains in the
    role of defending the Finnish frontier from Vyborg to Rayakoski,
    although it is heavily weighted to the south. The 37<sup>th</sup>
    Guards and the newly arrived 115<sup>th</sup> MRDs are now mobilized
    and both have a full Tank Regiment (TR). The 64<sup>th</sup> Guards
    MRD only has only a Tank Battalion but is equipped with very modern
    T-80s and, although rated as a Category ‘B’ Division, this formation
    is well trained and capable of offensive operations.

    -   64<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80/54, MTLB, BTR-50/60)

    -   37<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80/64, BMP-1, MTLB, BTR-60)

    -   115<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-64, BMP-1, BTR-60, BTR-152)

-   **6<sup>th</sup> Combined Arms Army (CAA)** forms the second echelon
    force to the **Archangel Corps** but its primary role is the defence
    of the Kola Peninsula. Although Plan BOYAR calls for 6<sup>th</sup>
    CAA to occupy Norway once that country has collapsed, in its current
    construct this formation lacks offensive punch with only one BMP
    equipped Motor Rifle Regiment (MRR) and less than 200 modern tanks.

    -   16<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-72/54, BMP-1, MTLB, BTR-152)

    -   54<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-80/54, BTR-60, MTLB, BTR-152)

    -   116<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-54, truck mounted infantry)

    -   131<sup>st</sup> MRD (T-80/54, MTLB, BTR-152)

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image9.png" style="width:6.66667in;height:2.94792in" alt="Image result for T-80 snow" />

Supporting activities are controlled directly by the Front HQ and
coordinated with the Northern Fleet, 76<sup>th</sup> Air Army,
6<sup>th</sup> and 10<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Armies as well as forces
directly controlled by the Leningrad MD (such as 18<sup>th</sup> Air
Defence Corps). The primary object of these operations is to reinforce
the efforts of **Archangel Corps** or to distract and confuse NATO
reactions.

**<u>Operations in Norway</u>**: For the most part the remainder of the
Front troops, particularly 36<sup>th</sup> Air Landing (AL) Brigade,
Naval Infantry, 2<sup>nd</sup> Guards Artillery Division and the bulk of
the other artillery, engineering air defence and logistics (not shown
above) units are supporting operations in Norway. Further, a large
portion of 2<sup>nd</sup> Spetsnaz Brigade is involved in Norway. These
elements fall into three broad roles: maneuver such as the AL, NI and
Spetsnaz elements; fire support including artillery and air defence; and
maneuver support including engineering and logistics forces.

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image10.png" style="width:9.45833in;height:6.12468in" />

**<u>SUPPORTING OPERATIONS</u>**: Activities in Norway will consume the
bulk of North-Western TVD’s attention and resources, but there is plenty
of scope for other thrusts aimed at disrupting NATOs response by
providing multiple dilemmas to deal with. To quote from the Commander
North-Western TVD – “The Americans might have coined the phrase ‘Shock
and Awe’, but it was the Russians who invented it!”

<img src="/assets\images\blog\post23\image11.jpeg" style="width:10.66667in;height:5.80208in" alt="Image result for btr-80 amphibious" />
