**Pacific Fury \#1 â€“ Bolt from the Blue**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by CHM April 2021</span>**

World War Three is half an hour old. So far - taking Andrew's experience
as the 'best case' - events have gone rather well... with a few
differences.

**Opening moves**

As the ominous warnings started flooding in I realised that the carrier
would be the primary target before she slipped away in a day or two.
Airbases weren't going anywhere. Independence turned south and the Leahy
accelerated north, Indy's escorts closing formation in a tight huddle
while calls were sent to the nearest JASDF base for support. Meanwhile,
everything that could fly in the hangar was armed and fuelled. The usual
flock of support aircraft and helicopters spread out around the carrier
group. At the north and south ends of Japan, USAF and USMC ready fighter
roared into the sky.

The turn south was not mirrored by the Soviet frigate close by, and she
slowly vanished over the horizon. Unfortunately there was no hiding out
here, and the number of Soviet recce aircraft doubled, then tripled. A
wall of jammers blocked the AWACS from detecting just what was rapidly
gathering over Vladivostok. A mountain of signals were being hoovered up
by the ELINT platforms, however. The Independence collected the Leahy,
and with her effective SAM defences doubled, swung north east along the
coast of Japan and accelerated, active sonar and helicopters sweeping
ahead.

War\! The flash message was accompanied near simultaneously by the
report of a light Japanese destroyer breaking apart from a close-range
torpedo shot. With the carrier's route undoubtedly infested with
submarines, P-3s based near Tokyo launched to supplement the carrier
group's organic ASW screen. Then the call came in - Vampire, Vampire...
but not from the AWACS circling over the carrier - from the Brewton,
escorting a tanker hundreds of miles east of the mainland. Somehow, a
Soviet SSGN laid astride her path. Cued by a Tu-16, the pair of missiles
sped in at wavetop level, mercifully slowly. Not an Oscar, then. Brewton
presented her flank and her 5-inch gun, miraculously, blew apart the
first missile before the Phalanx destroyed the second. But then a second
pair of missiles were detected.

Brewton's Phalanx performed heroically, spraying down them both. It
clicked empty as the third pair of massive missiles sped in. Brewton's
Seasprite crew watched helplessly as the tiny frigate simply disappeared
underneath them. More worryingly, a fourth - and surely final - pair of
ASMs launched, this time towards the defenceless, escortless, tanker. It
seemed certain that she would die, and the Independence group deprived
of vital fuel.

Meanwhile, the Indy had other concerns. A colossal barrage of supersonic
ASMs were being tracked, launched simultaneously from two points and
aimed squarely at the carrier. The JASDF fighters were first to react,
speeding off to the north and north west. Their attacks, usually from
the side, were worryingly ineffective - most missiles were outrun or
simply missed the streams of Shipwrecks. The AWACS crew realised that
they had to think of something new, and fast. The missiles were minutes
away, and there was no guarantee that the SAM defences along would be
adequate - and even if they were, would leave the carrier vulnerable in
future engagements. The pilots of the USN would have to pull their
weight.

Fortunately, they weren't alone. The concentration of defences over the
carrier, decided an hour ago, bore fruit. USMC and USAF planes joined
the Navy Tomcats and Hornets and nearly twenty aircraft, splitting into
two formations, approached the missile streams from dead ahead - and at
extremely low level. Phoenixes, Sparrows, AMRAAMs, all took their toll,
but then the fighters were nearly inside the streams. Each pilot knew
that once they had passed, there was no second chance. They lacked the
speed to turn and chase down the supersonic missiles. Sidewinders from
the leading aircraft proved extremely effective. The incoming targets
did not buck or weave, and fell in droves. Winchester, the fighters
sprayed cannon rounds as they flashed past, before turning and burning
back to the Independence or their land bases.

The north western missile group was destroyed a few dozen miles out from
the ships, but the northern group got closer. There was no room for
mistakes, and no more fighters were available. The same tactic was used,
with the Americans approaching from dead ahead, using their Sidewinders
and cannon as they closed. When the last of the 20-something Shipwrecks
nosed into the sea, twenty miles north of the leading frigate escort,
everyone - even me - exhaled a sigh of relief. The Oscars were not
unbeatable. They would creep back home, but the fighters could rearm a
lot quicker. Navy and Marine aircraft began recovering as CVBG
Independence, with full SAM magazines, cruised past the smouldering
wrecks of the Soviet frigate and SSV, blown apart by Harpoons minutes
after the first Soviet missiles were detected. Expensive sacrifices.
