**Northern Fury – Battlewagons to War\!**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by AndrewJ Aug 2017</span>**

Time to snuggle up to the enemy shore\!

I just know there's a sub lurking there somewhere with my name on it...
Probably right in front of the hidden ASM batteries\!

**The Situation**

Looking at the situation at the start, I have a lot of different
objectives to attend to. I need to get a dozen observation teams landed
by various means, provide logistical support to my little island
airport, and disperse my battleship task groups to their patrol zones by
morning. While doing this I'm expected to recce for the Russian tank
reserve, engage ground targets if possible, and protect my airstrip.
While there are three carrier groups in the region, they've elected to
proceed stealthily for the moment, and even their AEW /assets are
remaining covert, which is a little alarming. There's an E-3 out west,
but I may effectively be blind in the center and east of my main
operating area unless I want to turn on a radar and broadcast my
presence.

What's the threat? I have limited confidence in high command's
assurances that most of the Russians' main /assets have been neutralized.
I'm most nervous about enemy subs. A Kilo or Tango lurking along the
shore, taking advantage of the shallow bottom, could take a big bite out
of one of my task groups. Even a Charlie could cause a problem if I
elect to proceed with radars off, since I won't see their missiles in
the dead of night until their active seekers turn on, and at that point
it may be too late to engage. And I'm pretty sure we never did account
for that Oscar... Camouflaged missile batteries on the shore line
present a similar problem. Aircraft are clearly a big possible threat in
my radar-less condition, depending on how many strike planes they have
left, and a surge of Su-24s could be dangerous given that I'll nearly be
in range the moment they take off. Fighters popping up out of
Keflavik/Reykjavik could also pounce on my slow-moving helicopters and
Harriers. It would only take a couple to make a total mess of things.
Big ships probably aren't an issue anymore, and I'm not sure if I should
worry about missile boats. Could Osas cross the North Atlantic in brutal
winter weather? Probably not their favorite idea, although maybe they
freightered a few in. Finding the Russian army units isn't going to be
risk-free either. While their operational level SAMs may have been
knocked down (although it wouldn't surprise me if they've stuffed an
SA-10 in a warehouse somewhere for later), I fully expect there to be
plenty of smaller tactical air defence systems covering their army
/assets.

**The Plan**

With no effective fighter cover or local airborne radar I won't be able
to see threats coming or intercept them before they're on top of me. I
will have to rely on stealth to avoid drawing fire.

TG Missouri will move ENE, trying to stay in water that is deep enough
to form CZs and allow active sonar to work well against submarine
threats. RPVs will scout the shoreline and inland, but I do not intend
to close with the shoreline unless very important targets are spotted.
The TG may have to move to cover attacks on Vestmannaejar. The TG will
also pass through TG Shreveport's patrol zone to check for for
submarines as it sails on.

TG Wisconsin will move NNW, staying clear of the southern headlands
while heading to their station, and once again trying to stay in deeper
water if possible. It is very tempting to move inshore and bombard
Keflavik in passing, but this would bring the task group dangerously
close to the shore, and I will need my ammunition to support the
upcoming landings. I've also been asked to limit airport damage. There
is to be no bombardment unless significant air activity is detected.

TG Shreveport will have to cruise in essentially a straight line towards
the island airport, in order to get close enough for the slow moving
LCMs and LCUs to make it to shore in time, before turning aside to their
assigned station.

RHIBs, with their limited range, will be sent inland at cruise speed,
saving flank speed for emergencies. They will then dash for the island
to refuel before rejoining their groups, except for those from TG
Wisconsin, which probably can't reach their group which is sailing away.

Helicopters will proceed to drop-off and ferry locations at very low
altitude, radars off, in order to remain as covert as possible.
Flightpaths will remain over the horizon out to sea, before coming in
perpendicular to the coast in an attempt to limit possible detection
time. I will stay east of the Eyjafjallajökull mountain group to terrain
mask from Kef/Ryk during final approach, in case radars light up there.
I may use one ASW helicopter as a high altitude radar search unit to
check for hostile small craft, but this would be a very risky move given
the proximity of the Russian fighters in Keflavik.

So we begin...

**Playthrough**

As the mission begins my first surprise is that ESM reports a large
number of fishing boats at sea, detectable by their navigation radars,
and some of them are in areas I need to operate in. I doubt the
Icelandic fishermen will be cooperating with the Russians much, so I
elect to let them be, but this neglects the obvious point (or what
should have been an obvious point) that the boats may be commandeered or
operating under duress. This begins to prey on my mind as the mission
progresses, and I eventually realize that my ships have been under
intermittent observation for most of the time. ESM also picks up a shore
based jammer and an airborne jammer far off to the north.

Cargo helicopters launch to begin their cargo and special forces runs,
RHIBs deploy from the BB groups, and my task group formations tighten up
and get underway. The Russians don't just sit and wait while we travel,
however, and the small radar we've got on the island airport detects
helicopters lifting off just across the waters on the mainland, and
heading for my airstrip. Fortunately my Harriers on the island are quick
to shoot down the slow moving inbounds, and a couple of TLAMs into the
Russian helipad produce a satisfying number of secondaries when they
arrive a few minutes later.

Drones from the battleships spread out to do their scouting, and they
soon pick up some Russian troops along the south shore, and as they
proceed further they also spot some Russian ships (merchant, frigate,
and a big icebreaker) to the NW of Reykjavik. Some of my Cobras lift off
to start engaging the troop units, and that's when one of my drones gets
spotted (I think), and a couple of enemy fighters lift off to
investigate. My forces run as fast and low as they can, but as I had
feared it's not fast enough to save them all, and the Russians make
short work of a Cobra that was too close to Keflavik, and a couple of
the drones that didn't have a hope of running. The only thing that saves
me from a complete slaughter is the long range SAMs on my two cruisers,
which manage to knock down the two fighters before they can completely
eliminate my force.

With the skies momentarily clear the surviving drones continue to look
around, and they spot the Russian mechanized force headed south. The two
ground-attack Harriers launch to engage it, along with my second
TOW-carrying Cobra, and they manage to give it a severe mauling. (Oddly,
the best weapon system here is the 20mm cannon on the Cobras, which
turns out to have death-star effectiveness against the lightly armoured
AFVs.) Of course, my attackers can't stay hidden for ever while doing
this, and soon another two Russian fighters are on their way to
interfere, with the same results as last time. Run as I can, I lose
another Cobra and drone before I can get back under cover of my SAMs.

Meanwhile, at sea, the Wisconsin group engages the Russian ships with
long-range Harpoon shots. They're big, and take a battering, but are
essentially defenceless and soon succumb. The Wisconsin also puts some
TLAMs into the ground jammer up north, an artillery battery on the south
shore, and some interesting Reykjavik warehouses with red stars freshly
painted on the doors. In the south-east, one of my returning helicopters
overflies a landing beach and spots a massive swarm of small civilian
craft at Beach 6. A couple more TLAMs get rid of the docks in the area,
and a drone from the passing Missouri spots the MANPADS unit defending
the boats. The gunners gleefully open fire with the mighty 16" guns,
only to find the dispersion is so atrocious (CEP 285m) that they can't
hit a thing. The embarrassed gunners cease fire, and half a million
dollars of cruise missile is used on the startled MANPADS squad instead.
With the air defence gone the Cobras move in and sink the swarm with
rockets and gunfire.

These combats aside, my delivery and pickup missions were going well.
Helicopters are continuously shuttling back and forth to my island
airport, RHIBs are dropping off teams at their beaches, and helicopters
have snuck in to drop off their observer teams inland. SAR helicopters
rescue the far flung aviators, and I even manage to pick up a load or
two of wounded from the casualty collection point (although not enough
to clear the backlog). The LCU and LCMs arrive very close to the end of
my window and manage to unload successfully (although they don't have
time for a second trip). There was a moment of excitement when a
Spetznaz team was spotted on the island by an observant helicopter, and
swiftly executed by the door gunner, but a search didn't turn up any
others.

Russian air continued to make an effort. I had sent a Harrier sneaking
along at nape of the earth altitude to (successfully) tackle the jamming
planes up north, and as it returned the E-3 got a brief hit on an enemy
plane taking off from nearby Ryk. I was certain I was about to get shot
down, but the Harrier's night vision showed it was actually an Su-25
headed for my island airport, and there were more and more of them which
the distant radar had not detected. By this point my task groups were
too far away to engage, but between the returning Harrier and the one
scrambled from the island I was able to stop most of the attack before
it reached the island, and damage was minor. This was followed by a much
more frightening visitor when a Mig-31 lifted off to join the fun.
Everything I had ran for their lives, landing as quickly as possible or
trying to put a ship between them and the Mig. The Mig quickly found the
only remaining airborne unit, an SH-3 full of casualties running for TG
Missouri, and headed for it at high speed. Fortunately the jammers on
the Ticonderoga were able to prevent the Mig from locking on at long
range, and a brace of SM-2s shot it down before it fired on the airborne
ambulance.

TG Wisconsin reached its patrol zone shortly thereafter, slowing to
creep speed and suddenly finding they were sharing the patrol zone with
an enemy sub\! Two rapid fire ASROCs sank it before the helicopter could
get there, and the TG settled in to wait for morning. There was a little
more excitement as a pair of Su-27s made an appearance from the east to
have a go at my cargo helicopters. One was driven down to low altitude
by SM-1s from the Perry, overflew my island at low altitude, and got
blasted out of the sky by a salvo of eight Stingers, but the other
stayed out of reach. Meantime the scenario ended with a long range
Harpoon shot sinking the lone Pauk as the Missouri made it into its
patrol zone with minutes to spare.
