**Northern Fury – Sub Surge**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by AndrewJ Nov 2015</span>**

"ESM Contact\! Bearing 38º. Wet-Eye radar, probably a May sir."

"Lower the mast, helm to 300, back into the layer. We'll see a lot more
of those..."

"Sonar contact\! Underwater explosion sir, very faint, somewhere to the
NW."

"None of ours should be up there yet. Sounds like our Russian friends
are nervous."

Interesting scenario\!

Here's a quick summary of how it worked out for me, from NW to SE.

Lapon came in around the N end of Greenland, went to Patrol Zone E, and
never encountered anything.

Narwhal got a CZ contact on something as it headed north, and slowed
down to listen. The contact faded out of the CZ so Narwhal did not
engage, and instead continued north to its ESM positions. It picked up
the radar on some MPAs heading in and out of Greem Bell, but saw nothing
else of note.

Atlanta headed north to the center of Patrol Zone D, and never
encountered anything.

Seawolf headed in to Patrol Zone C and met a surface group, torpedoing a
Sovremenny and a Kashin, and then fled from a rain of airborne torpedoes
from what I assumed (wrongly) was a Udaloy out there somewhere. Seawolf
managed to escape (pure luck), but never made contact with anything
else.

Triumph lead the Polk and L. Mendel Rivers in around Bear island,
picking up something very quiet and unidentified. Rivers used a manually
guided torp to provoke it to move, in case it was an SSBN, and Triumph
put a Spearfish into it once it was identified. Polk successfully
delivered its team as Triumph and Rivers moved on to the cable area.
Triumph stood guard while Rivers started looking for the cable, but they
never found it before active sonobuoys and torpedoes started splashing
into the center of the zone, and both subs had to flee. That ASW Strike
is dangerous\! Triumph nearly died (Phit: 75, die roll: 78), and the
cable remains undiscovered.

Augusta had a very busy time, heading for Patrol Zone B, and finding a
juicy SSN contact to the NW. It was just about to head after it when a
second quieter SSN appeared from the SE... Pincered\! The SE contact was
very close, so three torps immediately went to it, and one torp BOL-ed
to keep the NW contact busy, while Augusta tried to break contact. The
SE contact died, but the NW one got away, until it came back looking for
the Augusta, which was able to kill it. A day later Augusta had another
close range contact with something very modern, and once again managed
to shoot first, increasing her score to three.

Down S the Perle patrolled uneventfully into Patrol Zone A, and then
picked up an SSN contact which was faster and had much better weapons
than the Perle. Fortunately, the Perle had the stealth and sonar
advantage, and in a 6 hour hunt it was able to curve around into the
baffles of the foe, trying to keep the layer between them, and torpedo
it from astern. Perle then managed to escape, dodging a few active
sonobuoys that never got closer than a couple of miles, but found no
more targets.

Looking around afterwards it turns out that during the two and a half
days the Russians used an awesome 10,912 sonobuoys, which makes me
wonder if the "endless sonobuoys" model that's currently in use is
realistic. Just how many buoys were actually bought?

The patrol zones in the shallow water were an interesting challenge,
frequently removing my ability to use convergence zones and sometimes
preventing me from using my towed arrays. On the other hand, I think
being so close to the bottom saved me from active sonar on a few
occasions. Still, the feeling of being blind was an interesting
constraint. The shallow water also slowed me down a lot, particularly in
around Bear Island and the Cable zone, where I had to slow right down to
avoid cavitation.

I think there's a lot of units out there that the player is unlikely to
meet, unless they abandon their patrol areas. I was also interested to
see how I'd do against some of the ASW patrol groups, which looked like
they might actually be a problem with the decent sonars on the Pauks,
but we never met. (In part because I was reluctant to go into the
littoral where they might be - so I guess they worked as the Russians
intended.)

I think the only thing I would suggest changing is giving the player a
little more information in the briefing about how his special tasks are
intended to work. It would have been helpful for route/speed planning to
know how long I was intended to be in each Sigint station, approximately
how long it would take to unload the Bear Island team, etc. The sub
captains would know this in advance, so it seems reasonable to tell the
players too.

Thanks for another great scenario. I'm looking forward to seeing what's
next\!
