**<u>KARELIAN FRONT</u>**

In addition to the air and naval forces based on and around the Kola
Peninsula, the major Army formation under North-Western TVD’s command is
the KARELIAN FRONT, a formation last used in the Second World War. The
KARELIAN FRONT is responsible for controlling all land forces in
North-Western TVD and in addition to security of the Leningrad MD has
the task of seizing Norway and other areas.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\army\karelian\image1.png" style="width:6.864in;height:5.96867in" />

In a retrospectively obvious attempt at disinformation and deflection,
the 6<sup>th</sup> Combined Arms Army (CAA) was significantly weakened
in the months leading up to the start of hostilities while some
shuffling occurred in the other formations. The lead formation of the
Front became the 26<sup>th</sup> Army Corps, now referred to by the
historical name **Archangel Corps**.

-   **Archangel Corps (26<sup>th</sup> Army Corps)**, significantly
    reinforced from its pre-coup structure is responsible for seizing
    Norway. In the year preceding hostilities, the 115<sup>th</sup>
    Mobilization Motor Rifle Division (MRD) was shifted to the
    30<sup>th</sup> Guards Army Corps (Vyborg Corps) in exchange for the
    full strength 45<sup>th</sup> Guards and 11<sup>th</sup> MRDs.
    Additionally, the 17<sup>th</sup> Tank Brigade which was formally
    known as the 6<sup>th</sup> Independent Guards ‘Berlin’ Motor Rifle
    Brigade, was added.

    -   45<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80, BMP-2, BTR-70/80)

    -   69<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-64/72, BMP-2, BTR-70/80)

    -   77<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80, MTLB)

    -   111<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-72, MTLB, BTR-60/70)

    -   17<sup>th</sup> Tank Brigade (T-72/64, BMP-3, BTR-80)

-   **Vyborg Corps (30<sup>th</sup> Guards Army Corps)**, remains in the
    role of defending the Finnish frontier from Vyborg to Rayakoski,
    although it is heavily weighted to the south. The 37<sup>th</sup>
    Guards and the newly arrived 115<sup>th</sup> MRDs are now mobilized
    and both have a full Tank Regiment (TR). The 64<sup>th</sup> Guards
    MRD only has only a Tank Battalion but is equipped with very modern
    T-80s and, although rated as a Category ‘B’ Division, this formation
    is well trained and capable of offensive operations.

    -   64<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80/54, MTLB, BTR-50/60)

    -   37<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-80/64, BMP-1, MTLB, BTR-60)

    -   115<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-64, BMP-1, BTR-60, BTR-152)

-   **6<sup>th</sup> Combined Arms Army (CAA)** forms the second echelon
    force to the **Archangel Corps** but its primary role is the defence
    of the Kola Peninsula. Although Plan BOYAR calls for 6<sup>th</sup>
    CAA to occupy Norway once that country has collapsed, in its current
    construct this formation lacks offensive punch with only one BMP
    equipped Motor Rifle Regiment (MRR) and less than 200 modern tanks.

    -   16<sup>th</sup> Gds MRD (T-72/54, BMP-1, MTLB, BTR-152)

    -   54<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-80/54, BTR-60, MTLB, BTR-152)

    -   116<sup>th</sup> MRD (T-54, truck mounted infantry)

    -   131<sup>st</sup> MRD (T-80/54, MTLB, BTR-152)

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\army\karelian\image2.png" style="width:6.66667in;height:2.94792in" alt="Image result for T-80 snow" />

Supporting activities are controlled directly by the Front HQ and
coordinated with the Northern Fleet, 76<sup>th</sup> Air Army,
6<sup>th</sup> and 10<sup>th</sup> Air Defence Armies as well as forces
directly controlled by the Leningrad MD (such as 18<sup>th</sup> Air
Defence Corps). The primary object of these operations is to reinforce
the efforts of **Archangel Corps** or to distract and confuse NATO
reactions.

**<u>Operations in Norway</u>**: For the most part the remainder of the
Front troops, particularly 36<sup>th</sup> Air Landing (AL) Brigade,
Naval Infantry, 2<sup>nd</sup> Guards Artillery Division and the bulk of
the other artillery, engineering air defence and logistics (not shown
above) units are supporting operations in Norway. Further, a large
portion of 2<sup>nd</sup> Spetsnaz Brigade is involved in Norway. These
elements fall into three broad roles: maneuver such as the AL, NI and
Spetsnaz elements; fire support including artillery and air defence; and
maneuver support including engineering and logistics forces.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\army\karelian\image3.png" style="width:9.45833in;height:6.12468in" />

**<u>SUPPORTING OPERATIONS</u>**: Activities in Norway will consume the
bulk of North-Western TVD’s attention and resources, but there is plenty
of scope for other thrusts aimed at disrupting NATOs response by
providing multiple dilemmas to deal with. To quote from the Commander
North-Western TVD – “The Americans might have coined the phrase ‘Shock
and Awe’, but it was the Russians who invented it!”

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\army\karelian\image4.jpeg" style="width:10.66667in;height:5.80208in" alt="Image result for btr-80 amphibious" />
