**Italian DD/DDGâ€™s**

Italy operates four destroyers and uses them to provide air defence to
the carriers, lead independent task forces or operate independently.
They are potent and modern ships that exhibit excellent sea keeping
characteristics

[**Audace**
**Class**](http://www.military-today.com/navy/audace_class.htm): These
two general purpose Destroyers were commissioned in 1972 but modernized
between 1988 and 1991. In their current form they represent a hybrid of
American and Italian systems with Aspide short range and Standard SM-1
missiles for medium range air defense. In addition to the 127mm gun,
these ships use eight Italian designed Otomat Surface to Surface
Missiles (SSM) for anti-ship targeting. These are good missiles with a
110 nautical mile range but suffer from needing mid-course guidance and
are limited to ship launched systems only. A single 127mm and four
OTO-Melara 76mm rapid fire guns augment both the air defense and
anti-surface batteries. Two AB-212 Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW)
helicopters round out the armament making these very potent well rounded
ships.

![](/assets/images/nato/it/navy/destroyers/image1.png)

[**De la Penne
Class**:](http://www.military-today.com/navy/de_la_penne_class.htm) Both
of these brand new ships (launched in March and October 1993) were
designed as improved versions of the very successful Audace class. They
have essentially the same armament but with more modern sensors and
control systems than their predecessors but with only three 76mm guns
vice four. These are well rounded world class ships

![](/assets/images/nato/it/navy/destroyers/image2.png)

| Class       | Pennant | Name               | Task         | Remarks |
| ----------- | ------- | ------------------ | ------------ | ------- |
| Audace      | D 550   | Ardito             |              |         |
|             | D 551   | Audace             | TG Garibaldi |         |
| De la Penne | D 560   | Durand de la Penne | TG Garibaldi |         |
|             | D 561   | Francesco Mimbeli  | TG V Venito  |         |
