**<u>Caribbean Fury \#1 – Hot Tamales</u>**

**<u>AAR by Tailhook, Sep 2016</u>**

Quite the scenario! Not yet completed but I'm going to give a Spoiler
Heavy account of the battle so far.

The setup is standard peace time operations in the Caribbean, with the
JFK CVBG transiting from the Gulf of Mexico out to the eastern Caribbean
for some training operations. There are various other SAGs and NATO
frigates on patrol in various locations, as well as a couple SSNs. My
orders are deliberately vague as I'm not supposed to be anticipating
anything (this is simultaneous with the first three Northern Fury
scenarios).

Out of nowhere, there are hazy reports of violence in Europe and before
long Gitmo is under artillery fire from Cuban emplacements. Initial
fires are directed at my Observation Posts and AT emplacements before
shifting to the airfield. My own 105mm artillery responds against the
Cuban infantry surrounding the base, and they are soon wiped out. I
launch a RQ-2A Pioneer to attempt to find the battery to the NW which is
the one hitting my airfield. It spots the offending battery in time
before being swatted by an inbound MiG or SAM. The defensive I-HAWKs and
Stinger units do an effective job of swatting the incoming CAP and
strike MiGs, with only one getting through to bomb the airfield for
minimal damage. In retaliation, I launch my single Snakeye equipped A-4
to bomb the artillery battery hitting the airfield before it can take
out my small force of aircraft. It is successful, wiping the entire
battery in a low and fast pass, but is shot down on final by another
MiG. I send two more Skyhawks to bomb the SA-5 site just NW of the base
to give myself a bit of breathing room. They don't wipe out the battery
but BDA does reveal they took out most of the AAA guarding it, a few
launch rails, and most importantly, all of the radar sets. After this
initial excitement, Guantanamo lies quiet, swatting the occasional MiG
striker. At least, for now.

To the Northwest a massive force of Cuban aircraft lifts off and presses
North on Key West. I only have some Navy aggressor aircraft there, and
while flown by experts they are poorly equipped and woefully
outnumbered. Still though, they put up a hell of a fight and are soon
reinforced by AMRAAM slinging F-16s out of Homestead ARB. These combined
forces manage to clear the skies for the most part, although in one lull
between waves a handful of MiGs get through to bomb Key West, taking out
a few F-16s on the ground. A Coast Guard cutter gets lucky and downs one
with a lucky burst of 20mm fire as it passes overhead, scoring one for
the Puddle Pirates! I order more F-16s from NAS Jacksonville to fly down
to Homestead and reinforce the squadrons there. There are a lot of
reinforcements across the CONUS scheduled to fly into the area
throughout the 3+ day scenario. Two notable twists occur: The Cubans
spend a lot of ordnance sinking a 200,000 ton civilian cargo ship (which
eats a lot of ordnance and lets me splash some of the attacking SU-24s).
The other twist is the Cuban Air Force makes a push on Florida, sending
a low raid against Homestead and the nearby Radar site. The Radar is
lost but a pair of transiting AMRAAM equipped F-16s manage to splash or
turn the attackers, who jettison their ordnance to flee. One F-16 is
lost over South Florida though.

Meanwhile in Belize, some British infantry are dug in against some
oncoming rebels. With the help of air power they turn the initial Rebel
push in the Big Creek Area. However, I'm given orders to pull those
defenders to join the bulk of the British forces in Belize City. This is
done via 2 airlifts from Belize City, covered by the 3 Harriers I have
in the area. I need the harriers because before long the Hondurans and
Nicaraguans join the fight on the Soviet side. The Harriers tangle with
F-5s, repelling them while I ferry my forces north. At the time of this
posting there is a race to get the helicopter to pick up the last forces
while a large force of Rebels moves on the Pickup zone. Stay tuned! I
reinforce the city with a British Frigate, using its onboard radar to
detect incoming Honduran aircraft, vectoring my Harriers behind them to
ambush them. Some get through, and I lose all of my British (light)
armor, as well as a Blowpipe team. The low clouds don't give them enough
time to use the simple missiles to much effect in the defense.

The next major engagement is the defense of the Panama Canal. A small
force of F-16s that had been on a training detachment find themselves
squaring off against 50+ Nicaraguan attackers bent on destroying the
Locks. Full disclosure, I adjust the readiness time of these units after
seeing the size of the incoming force (6 vs 50 as opposed to 2 vs 50).
It was a difference of a couple hours as opposed to the multi-day waits
on aircraft elsewhere in the scenario. Amazingly, my humble force aided
by local Stinger and Chaparral units is able to take out 30+ aircraft in
some spectacular fighting, for the loss of a single F-16. A few
attackers do break through, destroying the Centennial Bridge as well as
the San Miguel Locks. This will undoubtedly slow the war effort, but
with only a single lock destroyed I'm sure it can be fixed in time to
assist the war effort. Troublingly, I have a whole mess of attack
helicopters and gunships stationed in Panama. I order patrols into the
air to the East and West to make sure there are no ground attacks
incoming. A terrorist boat tried to ram the northern locks (stopped by a
pair of gunboats), so I can't be too sure of their safety. I ferry in
F-16s from Puerto Rico to reinforce the defenses in Panama, as well as a
team of French advisors who have offered their assistance.

After several hours of skirmishing across the AO, the next development
unfolds. A bunker spots a massive force of Cuban Armor closing on Gitmo.
I launch 3 cobra gunships and they destroy a Regiments worth of tanks. I
send a drone to orbit the base to give some more advanced warning.

There have been a few other small engagements, TLAM strikes on radars
and a harpoon or two into isolated ships. I'm still on the reactionary
side of the engagement but the situation is beginning to stabilize. I
have 3 days left so we will see how it plays out from here.

I think I got a lucky rolls and some great saves from the Air Force
F-16s keeping my southern bases in operation. Having a lot of fun
though, trying to figure out my next moves.

**On the ground front:**

Gitmo continues to hold by the strength of the Cactus Air Force 2.0. The
Cobras have been chewing up mechanized infantry formations to be backed
up by the occasional Skyhawk bombing run as well as the M1A1 Platoon and
artillery battery on base. I've killed a divisions worth of ground
forces with those units. Properly micromanaged I can use TOWs against
the AA guns before they get in range of my helos. If I break 1500'
though there's a SA-10 to the NW that sends a missile my way. If I get
some breathing space I might try and run a pair of Skyhawks out there to
bomb him. Quick turn saved my ass here though. I think barring another
serious aerial attack on my airfield I can hold out.

In Panama one of my patrols got lucky. An OV-10 overflew a column of
rebels marching for the southern portion of the Panama Canal. I
scrambled an AC-130 backed by some A-37s and made short but bloody work
of the intruders. There was some odd behavior with all of the aircraft
involved so this was a rather micromanage heavy defense on my part. The
rest of the F-16s from the squadron have arrived from Puerto Rico so I
can now establish proper, round the clock air defenses. The French
Marines are on the final leg of their flight from Martinique.

**At Sea:**

I've begun to consolidate my scattered forces with the intent of forming
larger SAGs. Right now I have a SAG centered on the CGN 37 South
Carolina supported by a DDG sailing North West from off the Bahamas. The
Dutch Frigate Banckert and Spanish Frigate Diana are making best speed
to rendevous with them somewhere north of Antigua. A French Frigate,
Ventôse is south of Haiti right now and will move north to meet them
north of Puerto Rico. It is my intention to sail this force down to
Guantanamo and secure the local area.

At some point a supply ship docked in Miami. I'm waiting to see if
anything comes of this (more AMRAAMs at Homestead would be nice...)

West of Cuba I had a Naval skirmish between a small SAG consisting of
the USS Arthur W. Radford and a pair of Knox frigates against a 5 strong
pack of Cuban Osa missile boats spotted by the groups ASW screen. The
missile boats were sunk, but one managed to get a shot off and sank one
of my frigates in response. Luckily her helicopter was already airborne
with a full load of fuel and has diverted 200 nm SW to the HMS
Westminster, now parked off of Belize City. The Radford SAG has splashed
a few other lone gunboats and is heading SE. I am sending the USS Dale,
a Leahy class cruiser to join up with them several hundred miles south
of Havana. I'm hoping to park this group right off the Cuban mainland
and let them antagonize the Cuban Air Force. I, err, might have missed
the Dale in the beginning of the mission because I probably would have
sent it to screen Panama, where it would have made a mess of the
Nicaraguan attack.

HMS Westminster is providing radar (the Hondurans managed to bomb the
British radar), naval gunfire support, and SAM coverage of the British
forces. The helicopters managed to evacuate all of the British forces to
a consolidated position in Belize City. Just in time too as a helicopter
has detected unknown ground forces approaching Belize City. Although
their air /assets aren't as strong as the Marines in Gitmo, I'm confident
that with the Frigate on station and a tight defensive position that we
can hold.

I have 3 SSNs at sea and another one leaving Galveston to sprint and
catch up to the JFK CVBG. USS Trepang is between Cuba and Florida and
I'm using it to sniff around for submarines in the area as the sky is
much too hot to get any Orions down there into that chokepoint. Nothing
yet. USS Greenling is 150 nm north of Columbia and making good time
north to Gitmo. I'm hoping it can provide some ESM intel off of Santiago
as well as deter any Cuban ships from the area. That's still a half day
of sailing away though. USS Sea Devil (great name) is between South
Carolina and Bermuda and tasked to go relieve/assist Trepang so that the
latter may head west to join the CVBG.

**In the air:**

The battle of Key West has stabilized. I haven't seen a proper massed
wave in a while now, with groups of no more than 4-8 attempting to push
me, backed by some SA-5 sites near Havana (I think these are low on
missiles because they don't fire often and are at max range to score
hits besides a single fluke). I was feeling pretty good until the Cubans
switched it up and brought up some MiG-31s and Flankers. I'm going to
assume those are not Cuban pilots in those. I'm lucky that these much
more capable aircraft have come in small groups because they did a
number on my ANG F-16s armed with Sparrows. Jamming aircraft are
orbiting over Cuba playing hell with my Sparrow shots, so I'm relying on
AMRAAMS when they're available and Sidewinders (thankfully the pretty
good M model) when I have to. Unfortunately, my only ECM aircraft that I
can see are a pair of Compass Calls in Gitmo (still too risky to attempt
to sneak these out), some ECM helicopters down in Panama (not a lot of
good for me there), and the Prowlers on the JFK which I want to save for
attacks. So the Cubans/Soviets enjoy a relatively unjammed angle to
launch at my fighters. I took losses amongst the F-16s but not enough to
break my back yet. Fortunately F-15s from Tyndall AFB have landed at
Homestead ARB and are 2 hours from being ready to join the patrols.

Faced with the more capable Russian aircraft and having had enough time
since hostilities to ready the Air Wing I launch F-14s to defend Key
West, supported by tankers from the mainland. Their long range Phoenixes
work wonders against the Russians and even more importantly let me snipe
the ECM aircraft orbiting south of Havana, and can cover all of western
Cuba. Local CVBG CAP is handled by Hornets so unless the Nicaraguans
bought some Backfires I feel good about their safety. More importantly,
with the MiG-31 problem now being handled and my gain of something
resembling Air Superiority, I can fly my P-3s out of NAS Jacksonville to
proof the CVBGs route farther than the groups organic S-3s and helos. My
plan is to park this group off of Key West to reinforce it with a FFG
from New Orleans as well as the USS Long Beach which is joined by
another FFG and DDG. At this point the more powerful force will either
sail East and proceed along the northern side of Cuba or turn around and
go West of Cuba, following the Randolph groups hopefully submarine free
path. It's really up to what Washington wants me to do because my orders
at this point are still "Stabilize Situation in Gulf of
Mexico/Caribbean".

USAF aircraft continue to pour into Florida from all across the country.
It's mostly Phantoms and Corsairs, but most of the high end Cuban stuff
should be dead by the time they're ready. Plus I have some fancy new
jets that were being tested at Eglin.

So yeah that's the plan.

-   -Deliver the KO over Key West. I think the Tomcats are going to do
    just that.

-   -Get TG South Carolina (reinforced with Europe) to Gitmo.

-   -Reinforce CVBG with TG Long Beach and other US small boys. Figure
    out what I'm supposed to do with all these tax dollars\*.

-   -Get Orions over the CVBG. I've been pushing it but I figured at
    Flank speed it would be hard for any subs to catch me for now, but
    I'm getting closer to Cuba.

-   -Strengthen TG Randolph (I might turn the French Frigate around too
    but it would be an easy kill if detected before joining the
    Americans) and position them south of Havana to annoy Castro.

-   ?Sneak a Compass Call out of Gitmo to Florida. Likely doable, but
    risky.

-   ?Send Snake eaters out of Gitmo to go after that SA-10 site. The
    more breathing space the better.

-   ?Reinforce the Bahamas. Venezuela is causing the Dutch concern, but
    they haven't done anything remotely threatening yet. Still, better
    safe than sorry and I'm sure it will be a hard sell to convince NY
    National Guard boys to go from February in NY to the Bahamas...

One of the messages specifically mentioned the 3 squadrons marked
"unavailable" at Eglin as going to be transferred away. I didn't see any
mention of the Tyndall fighters, other than them being on sustained ops.
They'll be nice to have but even if they go away I'm pretty sure the air
battle over Key West is effectively over with the F-16s and F-14s. I
err, might have forgotten about the New Orleans units. If the Air Force
bureaucrats take any of my F-15Cs away I will fly these Cajuns down to
take their place.

**Gitmo**:

A third wave of Cuban vehicles enters the valley west of Guantanamo.
Once more, Cobras sweep over them, backed by the base artillery.
Hundreds are killed and burning vehicles litter the valley. Only this
time a pair of MiG-23s race towards the Gringos. Hawk missiles leap up
to meet them in a race to save the helicopters so crucial to the
defense. The Pioneer drone circling at 1000' falls prey to a missile,
but the only Cobra fired upon has a near miss (PH - 53%, Result - 54)
before both MiGs are blotted from the sky. There are now at least 2
divisions worth of dead Cubans west of the American holdout. I order my
two Compass Call ECM aircraft, much needed over Florida, to use this
opportunity to takeoff. They fly out over the wave tops to the South
East, before turning for Haiti where they will then cut North and climb
to altitude safely out of range of any Cuban threats.

**Key West:**

My F-14s continue to launch Phoenixes over the mainland, wiping out the
airborne jammers and ELINT aircraft and also chipping away at the SU-27s
and SU-30s that seem to be guarding Havana. These same Flankers, while
yet to have scored a kill, keep launching long range Alamo missiles at
my CAP, which without the Phoenixes don't have the range to engage them
back, as too much of the Cuban IADS remains intact (although SA-5s seem
to be depleted).

**Panama**:

A pair of Nicaraguan Mirages makes a play against my now heavily
reinforced CAP. Armed with only short range IR missiles they are
splashed by the Sparrow equipped F-16s guarding the area. However, a
lone MiG-31 flies south from Havana (must be an AI oddity). For whatever
reason, it closes to close range with one of my F-16 patrols and
splashes one. The surprised wingman avenges his comrade, and a SAR helo
is launched from Panama to his last known location (Have Pave Hawk, will
travel). Meanwhile, a patrolling OV-10 thinks it spots movement in the
bush West of the Canal Zone. A pair of rocket armed Hueys is launched to
investigate. They (and the OV-10) find another wave of terrorists
closing on the Northern half of the Canal Zone. Attack helicopters
scramble and before long swarm the area like vultures, cutting down the
rebels where they stand. Meanwhile, the French cargo plane lands and
unloads a company of French Marines to help reinforce the area. (This
script didn't seem to work if it exists, but the message given made it
sound like I could move the French where I wished via the plane so I did
so using the editor.)

**TG Randolph:**

TG Randolph is my closest Naval unit to the Cuban mainland, and only
defended from Aerial threats by the Sea Sparrows of the Randolph (until
Dale arrives). Nevertheless, the threat comes from not above the waves
but below. A sonobuoy ahead of the formation gets a close whiff of a
slow and shallow SSK. Although the helicopter who dropped it was already
returning for fuel, his partner launches to localize the contact. Before
long, the Seahawk has the sub identified as a Kilo, drops an active buoy
on him followed by a Mk-46 to seal the fate of the submarine. This was
my first ASW contact and I'm sure not my last this scenario.

Much further south, Dale encounters it's own moment of peril. A trio of
patrol craft cross the horizon and are detected by the onboard surface
search radar. They are identified as Honduran and closing fast. Dale has
no gun larger than a 20mm and that's not a risk I want to take. Rather
than waste a precious Harpoon which could be saved for a more lethal
threat, I fire a pair of Standard Missiles used as AShMs into each. Two
are left burning profusely while the third is dead in the water. I
choose to save my SAMs and leave them as they are.
