<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig31\media\image1.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.31597in" />

[**MiG-31
‘Foxhound’**](https://www.fighter-planes.com/info/mig31_foxhound.htm)Based
on the design of and resembling to the MiG-25 is where the similarities
between these two interceptors end, the MiG-31 is a significant
improvement on a very good design. The Foxhound is longer, has a pilot
*and* a weapons systems operator (WSO), significantly advanced radar
(phased array vice mechanical scan), able to track multiple targets,
better engines, more and longer range weapons, secure data-links and
many other improvements.

Beginning production in 1975, the success of this aircraft spelled the
end of improvements for the MiG-25, with older versions being upgraded
to the ‘PDS’ model vice production of a follow on modernized airframe.

The MiG-31 was not exported. The role, similar to that of the MiG-25 was
engaging American bombers in the high arctic where its speed, long range
and powerful radar made an ideal fit. Anti-Satellite engagement was
another task, with a service ceiling of 82,000 feet and an ability to
launch very long range missiles, although this was still experimental in
1994.

Historically production and evolution of the MiG-31 was severely
affected by the breakup of the Soviet Union; the MiG-31M, a major
upgrade was flown in 1985 but was not put into production until 2008,
and by then a less capable follow on version, the ‘B’ had been built. In
Northern Fury production of the ‘M’ would continue and the original
aircraft would be upgraded to that standard and be given the designation
‘SM’.

**MiG-31 Foxhound-A**: The basic version of the interceptor. 349
produced, about 200 upgraded to ‘SM’ (Hypothetical), and 125 others
remaining in this configuration until upgraded;

**MiG-31M/SM Foxbat-B**: A much improved aircraft with upgraded radar
and IRST (Infra-Red Sense and Track), ability to carry six R-33 (AA-9
‘Amos’), and/or R-77 (AA-12 ‘Adder’) missiles. There are 200 ‘M’ and 200
converted ‘SM’ available to the PVO. Of note, the R-77 air to air
missile is becoming available to the PVO in limited numbers by the start
of Northern Fury.

**Note**: Historically there were about 150 MiG-31B built starting in
1990 with production virtually stopped in late 1991. In the Northern
Fury world the ‘B’ is never produced in favor of the ‘M’, and I’ve made
the assumption that 200 of the more advanced airframes could be built
over three years vice the 150 actually constructed in 18 months.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig31\media\image2.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.70486in" />
