**Northern Fury 8, Plug the GAP**

**AAR By Joel Radunzel**

Post 1

It's the second night of the war. The Soviets have overrun north Norway,
managed to land at Trondheim in central Norway, and something is
developing over Iceland. Intel suggests we have two Soviet battle
groups, one centered on a *Kuznetsov* and one on a *Kiev*, headed our
way. If the Russians are making a real push for Iceland than that
probably means we are off the hook here north of Scotland, but I'm sure
there are surprises in store. Regardless, the Russians have torn wide
holes in the GIUK gap that are likely to get bigger before they get
smaller and are making a strong push against the north Atlantic SLOCs.
Our o
<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf8\nf8_jr\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:5.02083in" alt="A screenshot of a map Description automatically generated with low confidence" />verarching
mission is to plug the gap north of Scotland.

On the NATO side, the HMS *Invincible* with a full complement of Sea
Harriers has put to sea west of Scotland with a strong escort. East of
Scotland, a surface action group consisting of four frigates, two
German, one Dutch, one Belgian, with the flagship on the Dutch Frigate
*De Ruyter* (hence the name, TG *De Ruyter*) is also steaming north.

We have operational control of a squadron of Buccaneer attack aircraft
and one of Jaguars at RAF Lossiemouth, though their standoff armament is
limited, consisting of sixteen Sea Eagle anti-ship missiles and a whole
bunch more Martel anti-radiation missiles. The remainder of the
anti-surface armament consists of 1000lb dumb bombs and 70mm rockets,
not the best loadout for going up against modern warships.

At RAF Leuchars we have a squadron of Tornado interceptors and another
of Phantoms, both equipped with Sky Flash missiles which are essentially
British copies of the American AIM-7 Sparrow. While these aircraft are
inherently better air-to-air platforms than the Harriers on Invincible,
the Harriers have the much more deadly AIM-120 AMRAAM, so those will be
the ones going up against the best Russian fighters if I can help it.
Unfortunately, stocks of these missiles on Invincible are limited.

The Government has charged us with protecting the evacuation of the
Faroe and Shetland Islands, which complicates things. Charter aircraft
are shuttling people south and four commercial ferries have departed,
two from each archipelago. The MoD is concerned about a Soviet play for
these islands, and as such two battalions of the Parachute Regiment, 1
and 3 Para, are going to be dropped on each location to secure them.
Jumping will get the troops down faster than trying to land the C-130s
at the small airfields, but the paras will only be able to bring light
weapons. The Danish Coast Guard Frigate HMDS *Hvidbjorgen* is in the
Faroes to provide some security for the evacuation. We want to hold
these island chains, but more importantly we want to forestall any
attack on Scotland itself.

And that's it. The Russian juggernaut is heading south. Let's try and
stop them again!

Post 2

HMS *Invincible* steamed through the night northwest of Scotland, her
escort all around her. The task force, of which the small carrier was
the flagship, was the strongest that the UK had put to sea since the
Falklands War twelve years earlier. The admiral commanding sipped his
tea while his staff filled him in on the situation.

A pair of AMRAAM armed Harriers were pulling CAP over the task force,
ASW and AEW helicopters were out, and a BARCAP of Tornadoes and Phantoms
was taking off from RAF Leuchars to patrol just off the north Scottish
coast. There hadn’t been any signs of the Soviets yet but reports from
Norway put two of their task forces headed south past Trondheim.

A Nimrod MPA was patrolling between the Shetlands and the Faroes, using
its radar to search for surface contacts. So far, the radar technicians
onboard had located a gaggle of five ships spread out along the
northeast arc of the compass, all moving southwest. Commercial ships had
been fleeing the northern ocean warzones for days now, and these
appeared to be some of the last stragglers. The pilot of the Nimrod took
his four-engine aircraft down through the clouds to visually identify
each of the radar returns. Over the next hour, close passes over the
ships confirmed that they were all commercial vessels. One was a medium
tanker, two were dry bulk carriers, and two were heavy lift transports,
both with bulky cargo embarked under large tarp-like coverings.

Things started to develop in the early hours of the morning. Technicians
aboard the Nimrod and also at listening stations on the Faroes began to
pick up radar emissions from Soviet patrol bombers, followed minutes
later by the signatures of two Su-33s to the north and two Yak-141s to
the northeast. Based on reports from the fighting off of Norway over the
past two days, this indicated that the Kiev-group, centered on the Baku,
was still to the east, while the *Kuznetsov* group was advancing out of
the west side of the Norwegian sea. The pattern of the enemy fighters
indicated a CAP over each group.

After a few minutes, the technicians began to pick up more signatures,
coming south between the two pairs of fighters. The sensor operators
began to sort these out into the signatures of eight Tu-22M bombers,
based on the emissions of their powerful Downbeat radars.

The admiral aboard Invincible ordered his task group to alter course to
the east to stay out of the radar detection range of one of
reconnaissance Tu-16s, which was working its way south between Iceland
and the Faroes. Then he ordered another pair of Harriers into the sky
and directed that these and the rest of the airborne CAP proceed north
to meet the incoming threat.

The two Harrier pilots rotated their vectored thrust nozzles down and
rolled down *Invincible*’s short deck, then lurched up the ski ramp at
the bow and into the cold night sky. There was no need to bank. The ship
was already oriented along their intercept vector.

The pilots of four Harriers, two Tornadoes, and two Phantoms proceeded
north towards the Faroes-Shetlands gap, hoping to prevent the Russian
bombers from getting into range to launch their missiles at the NATO
ships to the east and west of Scotland. These hadn’t been detected by
the Russians yet, as far as the NATO EW experts could tell, but with
several Soviet recon aircraft working south it was only a matter of
time.

As the flights of Harriers approached the Faroes to the northwest, a
distress call came in from the ferry evacuating civilians from the
western side of the Shetlands. A massive explosion had torn a gaping
hole in the ships side moments before, and the large craft was taking on
a massive list. There were hundreds of civilians onboard. The culprit
could only be a submarine lurking offshore, but why the Russians would
stoop to sinking an evacuation ferry was unclear. In horror, the admiral
realized that there were no /assets anywhere near the stricken ferry that
could offer assistance, particularly with two Soviet carrier groups
bearing down. The passengers and crew, those that were still alive,
would have to survive in their life rafts for a while. The Admiral
directed a second Nimrod, outfitted for ASW work, to transit north and
search the waters around the sinking ferry for the prospective Soviet
submarine.

Just then the voices of the technicians at both the Faroe and Shetlands
radar stations came over the net with the dreaded “Vampire! Vampire!”
Several small, supersonic objects had separated from the oncoming Soviet
Backfires and were heading towards both island chains.

The two flights of Harriers arrived over Vagar in the Faroes as the AS-4
missiles arced into their supersonic flight paths. The pilots of the
flight of Tornadoes flipped on their afterburners to try to reach the
airspace over the Shetlands as well, but they were further away and
slower than the incoming missiles.

Several of the Soviet weapons were obviously radar seekers, homing in on
the radar stations at the northern end of both archipelagos. The
technicians at both places switched their sets off to confuse the
Russian seekers. These tactics nullified the attacks, causing the Soviet
projectiles to miss their marks by hundreds, sometimes thousands of
meters.

Behind the ARMs came the anti-surface variants. Over Vagar the Harrier
pilots turned into the diving missiles and volleyed off their AMRAAMs in
a bid to protect the facilities at the airfield below. Only three of the
AS-4s survived the onslaught, but these did damage enough. One dove onto
Vagar airfield and exploded on the taxiway, shattering a charter
aircraft that had been earmarked to fly evacuees south. The other, an
anti-ship variant, acquired another of the evacuation ferries and dove
into the defenseless vessel’s hull, exploding and causing the ship to
slowly fold in half and sink in minutes. There would be no survivors.
The third missile acquired the Danish Coast Guard frigate HMDS
*Hvidbjornen* and dove. At the last second the Danish captain ordered
chaff rockets fired. These streaked away and exploded. The radar-guided
AS-4 followed a false return straight into the sea beyond the patrol
ship, exploding in a dull flash that lit up the night and the underside
of the clouds nearby.

The damage was far worse at Tingwall airport in the British Shetland
Islands. Here the Tornadoes had not arrived in time to intercept the
incoming Soviet weapons, and it was doubtful their less capable Sky
Flash missiles would have been effective anyway. Eight big Russian
missiles dove onto the airfield, wreaking havoc on the five parked
charter planes around the small strip and lighting fires all over the
complex. The destruction was terrible, made more so by the fact that the
field was crowded with civilian evacuees and the small airport lacked
the sort of damage control equipment necessary for this situation. With
all of the charter aircraft burning or broken and dozens of casualties
at the airport, there would be no more evacuations from Tingwall that
night.

On *Invincible* the admiral was stunned. In the opening minutes of the
battle he had completely failed in his directed task to protect the
evacuation of the islands. Dozens, maybe hundreds of civilians were
dead. He raged at the seeming carelessness of the Russians and the
stupidity of his own government that had put them in harm’s way in the
first place. Now his airborne Harrier pilots were out of AMRAAMs, and
the listening stations on the Faroes were picking up emissions from a
large group of Su-33s gathering to the north, and the radar station on
the Shetlands reported another group of four Tu-22Ms angling southeast
towards TG *De Ruyter.*

Post 3

The Russians were presenting the British air defenses with a serious
dilemma to deal with. Patrol bombers and Tu-22Ms were heading towards
the *De Ruyter* task group’s four modern frigates, requiring the
attention of the Tornado and Phantom interceptors that had failed to
intercept the missiles bound for Tingwall airport. At the same time, a
major sweep by a squadron of Su-33s from the Russian carrier lurking
somewhere to the north was developing towards the Faroes, where charter
aircraft that had survived the missile attack were readying to get as
many civilians off of the islands as possible. Both threats would need
to be met, but resources were scarce. To complicate matters, pairs of
contacts flying in loose military formations were also transiting south
between the two island chains towards Scotland.

Controllers on the Invincible vectored the four Harrier pilots who had
expended their AMRAAMs defending Vagar from the Soviet missiles eastward
to intercept this latest threat, while another pair of jump jets lifted
off from the British carrier and accelerated north to intercept the
squadron of Soviet naval fighters. A pair of Phantoms and another of
Tornados out of Leuchars would join them, while the Tornados over
Tingwall vectored northeast to intercept the Backfires making for TG De
Ruyter.

The first NATO pilots to make contact with the Russians were the Harrier
pilots sent to block the two flights splitting the distance between the
Faroes and Shetlands. In the darkness the two Brits banked until they
were behind the lead pair of contacts and closed until they could
visually identify the intruders as Tu-22 Blinders in the moonlight. A
Sidewinder missile exploded off of the rails of each British fighter and
streaked into the tailpipes of the unsuspecting Soviets. Two flashes
followed and both Russian medium bombers belched fire is they fell
through the clouds below and into the sea. The British pilots were
already turning north to identify the next pair of intruders, each
Harrier carrying one remaining Sidewinder.

The pilots used the same tactic to identify this second pair of
contacts, they approached obliquely from the front as their radars
tracked the bogeys, trying to get within range to perform a visual ID.
These two contacts were behaving the same as the Tu-22s which had just
been downed, but the behavior was a façade. As the Harriers approached,
the Soviet pilots of the two Yak-141 fighters turned into their
assailants and launched IR seeking missiles of their own at point blank
range. The British pilots barely had time to yank their sticks over in
an attempt to evade this unexpected attack.

One of the Soviet missiles exploded into the belly of the lead Harrier,
shattering the small jet and killing the pilot instantly. The other Brit
managed to evade his assailant by a clever combination of flares and
creative use of his thrust vectors. This maneuver also brought his nose
around towards the Russian fighters which were maneuvering to reengage
him, allowing him to snap off his remaining Sidewinder at point blank
range. The missile shredded the cockpit of the lead Yak-141, and the two
surviving belligerents engaged in a turning cannon dogfight in which the
better-trained Brit quickly gained the edge. A burst of 25mm ADEN cannon
fire shredded the Russian’s tail, sending the Yakovlev into an
uncontrollable spin. With the local sky clear, the British pilot swooped
low to see if he could spot any evidence in the dark water below that
his wingman had survived. When he could locate nothing in the darkness,
he turned back towards *Invincible* to rearm.

To the east the four Tu-22Ms were on a vector southeast towards the four
European frigates, which were arranged in a diamond formation with the
Danish Frigate *Niels Juel* leading and the two Dutch frigates and the
German *Lutjens*-class *Brandenburg*. Altogether they represented a
formidable collection of firepower including dozens of Standard and Sea
Sparrow SAMs, as well as two dozen Harpoon anti-ship missiles. They
would need the firepower.

Long before the Tornadoes approaching from Scotland could get in range
to engage the bombers with their Sky Flash TEMP Mods three of the Soviet
bombers released two supersonic AS-4s each and turned north for home.
The six missiles accelerated to their full speed and arced southeast
towards the small surface group.

Warned of the incoming weapons by the AWACS orbiting over northern
Scotland, the crews of the ships in TG *De Ruyter* lit off their radars
and prepared to defend themselves. As the Russian weapons came in range
and began to dive, SM-1 missiles exploded into the night in fiery arcs
away from their launching ship. The first Russian missile exploded in a
cloud of shrapnel, then two more. Then the shorter ranged Sea Sparrows
joined into the defense and knocked down the remaining three missiles.
The sailors aboard the NATO ships breathed a sigh of relief.

Then, as the two NATO Tornado pilots came within range of the remaining
Tu-22Ms, approaching from broadside, they loosed two Sky Flashes just as
the Russian bomber loosed its own two anti-ship missiles. The Russian
turned and evaded the two Sky Flashes, then two more, before a fifth
missile fired by the Tornado pilots broke one of the bomber’s swing
wings, sending it tumbling down. But the damage was already done.

The two anti-ship missiles approached TG De Ruyter, and more Standards
exploded northwestward. One of the AS-4s was knocked down, but the other
evaded the two SM-1s intended for it, and the Sea Sparrows launched to
compensate turned too sharply to engage and lost the return from the
launching ship’s radar. The big weapon slammed into *Niels Juel*’s
superstructure, penetrated deep amidships, and exploded. The Danish
frigate shuddered briefly, then began to fold inward, here keel broken.
The bow and stern tilted upwards, and in minutes the two halves of the
warship slipped between the waves.

Post 4

The major Soviet threat now was the sixteen Su-33s sweeping down on the
Faroes from the north. To oppose them two Tornados and two Phantoms were
approaching from the southeast, while a pair of heavily-AMRAAM-laden
Harriers were on an intercept vector from Invincible to the south. The
Sky Flash TEMP Mods carried by the Tornadoes out-ranged any missiles the
Sukois could carry, but they required the launching aircraft's radar to
remain pointed at the target through the missile's entire flight. The
Phantoms carried a much shorter ranged legacy version of the Sky Flash.
The AMRAAMs couldn't match the range of the TEMP Sky Flash missiles or
those carried by the Russians, but they had the advantage of being
fire-and-forget, meaning the Harrier pilots could launch them and then
turn to flee from the inevitable counterattack.

The plan of attack worked out by the controllers on the E-3D AWACS over
Scotland was for the Phantoms to attack under the cover of missiles
launched by the Tornados. As the Russian interceptors responded to this
threat, the Harriers would dash in and unload all eight of their AMRAAMs
against into the flank of the Russian formation. If all went well, this
would blunt the Russian attack long enough for more NATO fighters to
join the battle and tip the scales in the Brits' favor.

The attack started off well enough. The pilots of the two Tornados each
selected a contact on their radars and launched two Sky Flash missiles
apiece. The Russian pilots responded immediately and as expected,
turning into the attack and going to afterburner. The Soviets'
situational awareness was hampered by the fact that they were operating
beyond any friendly air, sea, or land-based radar or control and they
failed to notice the two Phantoms approaching at an off angle from the
first attack.

When the Russians were in range, the British pilots of the two Phantoms
lit off their own radars, acquired a target apiece, and engaged the
Soviet naval fighters with two of the older Sky Flash missiles each. As
the bright trails of the British missiles lit up the night, the Phantoms
could see the first flashes in the distance of the Soviet counterattack.
The Brits began to sweat as their RWRs growled that the enemy radars had
locked onto them, a sure sign that Soviet air-to-air missiles were
inbound.

At this point the NATO plan began to fall apart. The British flyers had
eight missiles in the air targeted on four Russian aircraft. The flashed
into the Soviet formation and exploded, but only managed to down two of
the nimble Soviet Su-33s. That left fourteen of the Russians to contend
with. The Tornado and Phantom drivers were already banking their
aircraft into a tight turn and punching their afterburners when the
Soviet riposte arrived. Some of the Russian missiles had gone wild when
their launching aircraft had been destroyed, but several remained, but
not enough.

The first NATO casualty was one of the Phantoms, blown to pieces when a
Russian missile detonated feet away from its underbelly. Then one of the
Tornadoes took a cloud of shrapnel into its engines, turning the
interceptor into a glider from which the fighter bailed out over the
dark ocean. The two surviving pilots were now clawing every knot of
speed that they could get from their airframes as the more modern Soviet
fighters closed in. Just as it looked as if they would lose the race,
eight AMRAAMs exploded into the Soviet formation from the south in a
concentrated volley.

The two Harriers approaching from *Invincible* had kept their radars
off, vectoring off of guidance provided by the network of NATO ground
and airborne radars still active. As they closed with range of the
southeast bound Russian fighter sweep, both pilots had flipped on their
radars and as rapidly as possible volleyed off their entire load of
eight missiles targeted at four of the bigger Soviet jets before turning
back towards HMS *Invincible*.

The Soviet pilots attempted to avoid this new threat, evading a few of
the active radar-homing missiles but not all. In the end all four
targeted Soviet fighters were downed. The surviving Russian pilots broke
off their pursuit of the fleeing Phantom and Tornado. Unfortunately for
the Harrier pilots, the ten surviving Su-33 drivers now concentrated
their attention on the two Harriers, which lacked afterburners and were
far outmatched by the Russians in a footrace.

A deadly drama developed northeast of the Faroe Islands as the Harrier
pilots attempted to flee into the protective SAM envelope of the
Invincible task group while the Russian tried to overtake them and shoot
them down first. The Russian naval aviators quickly overtook the slower
jump jets, and missiles leapt off the rails of the lead Soviet fighters.

RWR warning buzzers filled the Brits' helmets as the Soviet weapons
closed, the pilots tipped their noses downward to try to gain speed as
the they twisted in their seats to try to locate the incoming threats.
The two Harriers dropped through the clouds as the Russian missiles
closed. One of the AA-10s exploded directly behind the lead Harrier,
causing the small jet to tumble and disintegrate midair. The trailing
Brit, seeing his leader die, flipped his stick over just in time to
evade the missiles meant for him.

The surviving British pilot, after his evasive maneuver, leveled his
aircraft out meters above the choppy Norwegian Sea, still heading
southwest towards the Faroes. The Russian pilots, struggling to pick the
small British jet out of the sea clutter, descended as well and
continued to close. The British pilot's helmet again filled with noise
as more Soviet missiles streaked towards him from behind. Without
altitude, he had no room to maneuver anymore. With just seconds
remaining until impact, a dark shape loomed in the darkness ahead. The
pilot tilted his nose up and rocketed over the rugged coast of Suduroy,
the southernmost of the Faroe Islands.

The Russian missiles followed him up, but just in time the Brit tipped
his nose downward and was past the southwest coast of the island. Now
the rugged land mass was between him and his pursuers. The Soviet
missiles, lacking a radar return to home in on, flew off into the night.
The British pilot, staying low, banked left and settled into a new
course due south. Two minutes more and he was within the protective
range of the Sea Dart missiles carried by the Type 42 destroyers of
*Invincible*'s escort. The Russians broke off their pursuit and climbed
back to altitude, returning to a patrol station north of the Faroes. The
British had traded three of their jets for six Russian fighters, but the
Russian now held sway in the skies over the northern island chain.

Post 5

With the Soviet naval fighters patrolling over the Faroe Islands, the
British command aboard HMS *Invincible* was forced to pull back their
western aerial flank. Tornados and Phantoms from RAF Leuchars still
pulled CAP over the three surviving ships of TG *De Ruyter* and the
Shetlands, while the AMRAAM equipped Harriers of the British carrier
task group remained within the protective bubble provided by the
long-range Sea Dart missiles carried by *Invincible*'s escorts.

As the night moved into the early morning hours both sides scored
successes and suffered losses. The pilot of a lone RAF Tornado from the
TG De Ruyter CAP, working from direction offered by the controllers in
the E-3D over Scotland, switched off his radar and turned north. After
several minutes of cruising he was within range of the valuable Tu-95
Bear reconnaissance bomber whose crew had provided targeting for the
Tu-22M strike on the surface group earlier. Once in range the pilot
flipped on his radar, locked it onto the huge Russian four-engine
turbo-prop aircraft, and lofted a single Sky Flash missile northward.

The crew of the lumbering Soviet aircraft barely had time to react to
the threat. Their radars were meant for surface search, and without an
airborne radar asset they had been oblivious to the approach of the loan
NATO interceptor. The Soviet pilot was just beginning to put his
aircraft into a banking dive when the Sky Flash detonated over the
middle of the port wing, sending shrapnel through both engines and
starting a fire that quickly engulfed the entire wing. The pilot
maintained level flight to allow his crew to escape. Once all had bailed
out over the dark water below, he put the bomber on autopilot and made
his way to the emergency exit. Just as he got there the structural
integrity of the wing failed. The bomber folded in upon itself and
tumbled towards the moonlit clouds below. The pilot did not escape.

Further west, the helicopter ASW screen for Invincible had been tracking
several contacts during the night. One after another proved to be false
contacts or biologics, which hadn't stopped one of the Task Group's more
jumpy helicopter crews from launching and expensive Mk46 torpedo into a
school of codfishes. But one contact remained persistent and was drawing
closer to the NATO formation from the northeast. The NATO helicopter
crews used passive sonobuoys and dipping sonar along with their MAD
sensors to localize the contact. After about an hour they screen
commander was willing to accept the contact's designation as a Soviet
Sierra-class submarine and ordered his aircraft to engage.

Two Mk46 fish were dropped from one of the helicopters directly onto the
tail of the Soviet boat, whose crew were unaware that they were even
being tracked. The Russian captain, belatedly aware that he was under
attack, barely had time to order his ship to flank speed before the two
fish, diving from above and behind, detonated their warheads, one
against his ships screw, the other above the engine room, which quickly
flooded. The sub's engines stopped, and the ship slid backwards into the
depths of the Rockall Trough.

To the east, the NATO ASW effort was less successful. In TG *De Ruyter*,
the frigate *Niels Juel* had been the ASW picket for the four-ship
formation. The destruction of that ship in the strike by the Tu-22Ms had
allowed the captain of a Soviet *Tango*-class diesel-electric boat to
successfully stalk the NATO ships. The first warning that the crews of
TG *De Ruyter* received of the threat was the sound of high-speed
torpedo screws approaching from directly ahead at close range.

While the three ships maneuvered violently to try to evade the sudden
threat, the airborne ASW help sped towards the location where the
torpedoes had first been heard and began searching the back bearing for
the enemy ship, which the dipping MAD equipment quickly detected. The
helicopter dropped smoke to mark the site, banked into a circle and came
back around to drop a Mk46 into the water.

The NATO counterattack was too slow for the German frigate
*Brandenburg*, however. The two big Soviet torpedoes pressed in
relentlessly and detonated under the ship's keel, causing structural
failure throughout the ship. Even so, the frigate did not break up, but
rather settled in the water, giving much of her crew time to scramble
into life rafts and boats.

The Soviet captain had erred in concentrating his attack on one ship,
however. With the Mk46 in the water chasing his boat, he was unable to
execute a second attack on the two surviving NATO frigates. In the end,
his evasive maneuvers were futile as well and the *Tango* joined the
*Brandenburg* on the bottom of the North Sea.

Perhaps the most satisfying NATO victory of the night so far occurred
when the Nimrod, sent to locate the sub that had sunk the evacuation
ferry off the west coast of the Shetlands, detected, localized, and
engaged its prey, a Soviet *Kilo*-class submarine. The destruction of
the Russian warship did nothing to bring back the dozens of civilians
who had been dumped into the frigid waters earlier in the night, but the
NATO crew felt that at least some justice had been served for the
travesty. However, the Nimrod's pilot was quickly forced to withdraw
south due to ominous developments north of both island goups.

Post 6

As night advanced into the dark early hours of morning, a new and
unexpected threat appeared that threatened to deliver control of both
the Faroe and Shetland Islands to the Soviets without even a fight.
Powerful radars on the patrolling British Nimrod aircraft had allowed
the crews to locate and track the eastern Soviet surface force, centered
on the smaller Kiev-class carrier Baku. To the west, the captain of the
submarine HMS *Turbulent* had come to communication depth to report that
he had detected and tracked the entire *Kuzentsov* group, but the
geometry of his approach was such that he had been unable to attempt a
penetration of the carrier group's screen, electing instead to shadow in
their wake in hopes that the Russian ships might turn back and offer him
a shot.

South of these groups, a gaggle of merchant ships had been fleeing
south. Some of these ships were in contact with Scottish maritime
authorities, some not, which wasn't in itself particularly strange. What
was strange was a radio conversation in the clear between two of the
vessels, spoken in Hungarian accents, that produced the following
transcript:

-Ship 1: (\~63 2N 04 3W) … in position for delivery are you?

-Ship 2: (\~62 2N 01 2W) One ….. other soon.

-Ship 1: Good, flooding … good riddance.

-In Russian: (\~67N 02W) Terminate all transmissions immediately.

The Russian command had abruptly ended the radio conversation. The
Admiral's intelligence staff was still trying to make sense of these
intercepts when a Flash message from US 2nd Fleet arrived. The message
announced that NATO forces were abandoning Iceland due to a major Soviet
airborne operation there, and indicating that the Shetlands-Faroe sector
could expect only continued probing attacks as the Soviets concentrated
their major forces against Iceland. The message also limited air
operations to south of the line 63 Northing and naval operations to
south of 61 Northing. With the attacks on Northern Norway and Iceland,
it appeared not to the Admiral's staff that all of the major Soviet
forces in their theater were decisively committed. They were only
partially right in their assessment.

Thirty minutes later the meaning of the cryptic radio intercept began to
become clear. Earlier in the night a Nimrod had buzzed the two ships who
had transmitted and identified them as heavy-lift vessels, both carrying
large, covered objects that hadn't been identified in the darkness and
because of large tarp-like coverings. Now, radar operators on the
patrolling Nimrod watched two smaller contacts break away from each of
these vessels, bearing south at over fifty knots. Only one kind of ship
of that size and speed existed in this part of the world.

Four massive Soviet MDK *Zubr*-class hovercraft thundered southward
across the choppy Norwegian sea, two making for each island group. Each
vessel, propelled by three gigantic fans and capable of carrying an
entire company of naval infantry with their armored vehicles, would
reach their destination in less than a hour. If they made it, the
islands would fall. British Paras from 1st and 3rd Battalions, the
Parachute Regiment, were scheduled to drop at Vagar and Tingwall at
dawn, but these operations would be suicide for the lightly armed
paratroopers if Soviet marines and armored vehicles already occupied the
drop zones by then.

Fortunately, the NATO commander had /assets to deal with this surprise
development, though dealing with it would come at a cost. Buccaneer
attack jets were being readied at RAF Lossiemouth for a strike on one of
the Soviet surface groups. Some of these could be dispatched to attack
the hovercraft, though this would deplete the already limited number of
standoff Sea Eagle missiles available for the attack on the better
defended Soviet carriers. Still, the Admiral determined that the loss of
the islands north of Scotland would be a far worse outcome than a
delayed or ineffective strike.

After extremely abbreviated mission briefings, four RAF Buccaneer pilots
rushed to their waiting aircraft, went through a truncated pre-flight
checklist, then taxied to the runway before taking off in pairs. The two
flights of attack jets, each aircraft carrying two of the precious Sea
Eagles, split up based on guidance provided by the Nimrod and pushed
their throttles forward to full military power. They had enough time for
the intercept, but there would be no opportunity for a second strike if
this one failed. To the east, the CAP of four Tornadoes also turned
north to provide the bigger jets with protection.

Now the threat became more complicated. The surviving radar station in
the Shetlands reported detecting contacts rising from the Baku group
that were faster than the helicopter escorts which had been airborne
throughout the night. Soon eight fast-moving contacts were in the air,
heading south directly between the two pairs of *Zubrs* and directly
into the path of the oncoming British Buccaneers. The pilots of the four
Tornadoes, taking direction from the AWACS further south, pushed they
throttles to full and leapt forward to the intercept.

What followed was the most one-sided engagement of the night. The
British pilots, armed with long-range, radar guided Sky Flash missiles,
began to engage at maximum range. Their targets, the slow,
stubby-winged, Yak-38s of Baku's air component, possessed nothing more
lethal than short-ranged IR-guided missiles. They came on, but one after
another was blotted from the sky by the volleys of British missiles. In
minutes, the Soviet aerial coverage of the developing naval landing had
been annihilated, clearing the way for the Buccaneer drivers.

The Yak-38s had accomplished one thing, however. They had forced the
patrolling Nimrod, which had been tracking the Soviet hovercraft, to
switch off its radar and flee south to clear the aerial engagement area.
Now the Buccaneer pilots had to rely on their own, powerful surface
search radars for the final targeting of their missiles. As each pair of
aircraft reached their release point, the pilots flipped on their
sensors and between the two assigned their targets. Once they were
certain of their targeting vector, each pilot released his two Sea
Eagles. The eight weapons launched off their rails, engines ignited, and
dropped down until they were flying northwest at sea skimming altitude.

Here again the Soviet lack of aerial radar coverage hampered their
response. The crew of the first *Zubr* targeted didn't even know they
were under attack until the lead missile plowed into the port bow of the
craft, exploding among the crammed naval infantrymen, BTR-70s, and PT-76
tanks. The impact shredded the front skirt of the hovercraft, causing
its bow to quickly settle while the massive fans in the back continued
to push the ship forward at high speed. The second missile then impacted
and demolished the ship's bridge, ending any hope that it could be
saved. The fans continued to spin at full power, and in moments the
wedge-shaped bow caught the choppy waves. The huge ship lifted violently
by the stern, almost flipping over as vehicles and men tumbled forward
inside. Then the craft crashed back down and was rapidly pushed beneath
the waves by its own propulsion system.

Lookouts on the trailing *Zubr* had seen the double flash signifying the
death of their sister ship and had alerted the captain. The *Zubr*s
possessed some defenses against missile attack, including two AK-630
30mm CIWS, and two quad Strela-2 missile launchers. The captain of the
second hovercraft ordered his radars active. These quickly detected the
fast-approaching Sea Eagles and the hovercraft's defenses came alive.
30mm cannon fire ripped from the port CIWS system, walking into the
leading missile and detonating its warhead in a flash that lit up the
dark clouds above and sea below. But it wasn't enough. The second
missile was too close, and the automated AK-630 system failed to lock
onto it before it too plowed into its target, wrecking the Zubrs
propulsion fans and shredding the rear of its skirt. The captain, his
ship dead in the water, was forced to order his crew and the infantrymen
in the hold to abandon ship, trusting their lives to the icy Norwegian
Sea.

The results were the same for the second pair of Soviet landing ships.
In that case, one of the missiles targeted at the lead craft
malfunctioned and flew straight by the ship, but not the second. The
second ship also managed to down one of the incoming threats, but it too
was damaged beyond repair by the last surviving missile.

As the four Buccaneers flew south, the British pilots were gratified to
hear the report from the Nimrod, now back on station, that their targets
had either disappeared below the waves or were dead in the water. The
Paras' drops on the Faroe and Shetland airfields could proceed. Once
there, capture by a Soviet *coup de main*, as had just apparently been
attempted, would be much, much more difficult.

Post 7

As the situation now stood, the Soviets were in tentative control of the
airspace over the Faroe Islands, patrolled by Su-33s from the
*Kuznetsov*, while the British Tornadoes and Phantoms patrolled over the
Shetlands to the southwest. The British would need to push the Soviet
patrols back from the Faroes, at least temporarily, if the dawn
paratroop drop by 1 and 3 Para out of RAF Brize Norton in the south was
to have any chance of success. The Harrier pilots aboard Invincible,
after discussing the imperative with the men who had already engaged the
powerful Soviet fighters and survived, settled upon a tactic they hoped
would neutralize the Russians’ advantages in speed and performance. The
squadron commander went off to raise RAF Leuchars on the radio to work
out the coordination.

It took over an hour to get the pieces in place. A pair of Harriers had
taken off from *Invincible* and headed northeast until they were several
dozen miles southeast of the patrolling Soviet fighters. A flight of
four Tornado pilots circled several miles to the Harriers’ southeast. On
order from the AWACS, the Harrier drivers turned towards the closest
pair of patrolling Russians and lit off their radars. The Russian pilots
responded immediately, turning towards the threat and going to
afterburner.

The Sukois’ pilots were met by four AMRAAMs, which they attempted to
evade. One succeeded, but his wingman’s aircraft tumbled into the sea.
The surviving Russian pilot, enraged, pressed his pursuit of the now
withdrawing Harriers. He was just pulling within range of the trailing
one when his RWR started to squawk that he had been locked onto by a
hostile radar. Looking up he could make out the fiery specks of two Sky
Flash missiles, fired by the oncoming Tornadoes, arcing towards him. He
threw his fighter into a defensive maneuver to shake the missiles and
succeeded, at the cost of losing the chance to engage the Harriers. The
maneuver also bled his speed and altitude so that when the second pair
of Sky Flash missiles arrived there was little he could do but pray. It
didn’t work, as the second missile exploded, sending shrapnel ripping
into his cockpit.

The NATO pilots were elated with the success of their tactic. Using the
AMRAAM armed Harriers as bait put the Russians in a bind because they
could not ignore the jets longer-ranged missiles, but pursuing the jump
jets exposed them to concentrated fire from the Tornadoes. In the next
couple of hours the British pilots executed two more of these ambushes,
downing several more Su-33s for the cost of a Harrier and a Tornado. The
British commander began to feel confident that he could clear the skies
over the Faroes before the Paras arrived.

The Russians weren’t sitting on their heels either, however. A surprise
low-level dash by a pair of Su-33 pilots managed to catch the British
Harrier CAP over the Invincible group out of position. The Russians
penetrated the outer screen of the task force and made for a pair of
*Invincible*’s helicopters at the northern end of the formation. Though
the helicopter pilots were maneuvering for their lives, they never had a
chance. Russian missiles slammed both of the craft down into the sea.
Worse, these had been the Task group’s local AEW platforms. As the
Russians escaped northward, chased by Sea Dart missiles which fell into
the sea, the situational awareness for the British fleet stood much
reduced.

Though the *Kuznetsov* was drawing closer the Faroes, making it easier
for the Russian pilots to keep their patrols over the islands, the
losses inflicted by the British pilots’ ambush tactics were such that
the Russian naval aviators were now forced to pull back, mingling their
patrol with that of the Russian carrier’s CAP.

Dawn was now breaking to the southeast. The rising sun saw two streams
of C-130 transports crossing northward over Scotland. They carried two
battalions of the Parachute Regiment, who would jump into Vagar and
Tingwall to secure those airfields from the Soviets. The British
commander felt confident enough in his situation to leave the less
capable Phantoms to protect the drop on the Shetlands while he ordered
his Tornado pilots with their longer-ranged TEMP mod Sky Flash missiles
to forestall any Russian interference over the Faroes. The Harriers
would patrol the Faroes airspace as well, but the stocks of AMRAAMs on
*Invincible* were almost exhausted, meaning that the jump-jets’
air-to-air usefulness would soon be radically reduced.

As it turned out, the Soviets didn’t contest either drop. The Hercules
transports came in low over both drop zones and lines of parachutes
blossomed out of plane after plane. The British paratroopers hit the
tarmac and the surrounding snowfields in tight stick patterns. The
soldiers shrugged out of their harnesses, took their weapons out of the
padded jump cases, shouldered their rucksacks, and moved out to their
assembly points. Squads formed up, then platoons, and soon units were
moving out in tactical formation to occupy their defensive positions.
Both island chains were now more or less secure from Soviet invasion.

The Soviet carrier groups continued south, however. The group centered
on the smaller helicopter carrier *Baku* was now angling its course
southwest towards the Faroes. The *Kuzetsov* was further north and
showed no signs of altering its course, which would eventually bring
that formation to the west of the islands. The admiral commanding HMS
*Invincible* and her escorts had placed his task group on a course that
would put them into a blocking position between the two groups of
islands, from whence he could engage the smaller Soviet group, if the
conditions permitted.

To facilitate those favorable conditions, the Buccaneers and Jaguars at
RAF Lossiemouth were preparing a strike on that group that would
hopefully weaken it enough so that *Invincible*’s strike could be
decisive.

Post 8

While the Buccaneers and Jaguars readied for their strike mission at RAF
Lossiemouth and the Invincible Task Group rendezvoused with the two
surviving frigates of TG *De Ruyter* between the Shetlands and Faroes,
the Admiral's staff aboard the British carrier worked to establish
communications with the Paras on the ground at both Vagar and Tingwall.
To this end, *Invincible* dispatched two helicopters, one to each
airfield, carrying small contingents of Royal Marines with communication
equipment so that the soldiers could communicate with their naval
support offshore.

The helicopter flying to the more southerly Shetlands arrived at its
destination first without incident, but the bird destined for the Faroes
became the center of an aerial drama that drew in increasing numbers of
fighters from both sides.

The helicopter with its cargo of Royal Marines was detected by a
two-ship CAP of Su-33s who had been patrolling north of the Faroes after
their earlier scrapes with the British Harriers and Tornadoes had forced
them out of the airspace directly over the islands. Sensing an
opportunity for an easy kill the two Soviet pilots accelerated to full
military power and vectored onto the lone contact. Seeing this, the
controllers aboard the British AWACS over Scotland ordered the two
pilots of *Invincible*'s CAP, composed of AMRAAM armed Harriers and
which had been shadowing the helicopter at a distance, to intervene to
protect the transport.

The two British aviators sped north as fast as their airframes could
carry them, interposing themselves between the vulnerable helicopter and
the oncoming Russians. The range closed, and four AMRAAMs streaked
northwest into the predawn darkness. The Russians returned fire,
launching their own long-range missiles, but the British weapons had the
advantage. Both Soviet fighters were shattered by shrapnel from
exploding warheads. The Russian missiles, left without guidance, flew on
harmlessly until they ran out of fuel. The first attack had been
defeated, but TG *Invincible* was now entirely out of the wonderful
AMRAAM missiles that had given them such an advantage.

As the Harrier pilots withdrew, another Soviet Su-33 pilot, this time
alone, turned his big naval fighter towards the low-flying helicopter
and accelerated. This threat fell to the pilots of two Tornado pilots,
who were trailing the helicopter by several miles, to deal with. A pair
of Sky Flash TEMP Mod missiles arced northwestward towards the lone blue
and grey painted Russian fighter. The Soviet pilot tried to evade and
withdraw, surprised by this new threat after the Harriers, but he
couldn’t avoid the second missile, which exploded into his aircraft as
he was pulling out of his evasive maneuver for the first. A few minutes
later a fourth Su-33 attempted to dash in from the north, but this one
two was engaged and destroyed by the escorting Tornado drivers with
their much longer-ranged missiles.

The helicopter flared and landed at Vagar, its occupants unaware that
they had been the center of a fierce battle that had netted the NATO air
forces tentative control over the Faroe islands. With the *Kuznetsov*’s
air group heavily attrited, the NATO fliers could concentrate on their
first purely offensive mission of the day. As the helicopter headed back
towards Invincible, Buccaneers and Jaguars began to roll down the runway
at Lossiemouth.

Post 9

The squadron of Buccaneers formed up over RAF Lossiemouth for the strike
on the Kiev-class carrier Baku and her escorts, which were now passing
from northeast to southwest on a course for the Faroe Islands. The plan
was to attempt a heavy strike on the carrier, hopefully crippling her,
so that the *Invincible* task group, reinforced by the remnants of Task
Group *De Ruyter* could engage the Russians in a decisive surface
action. The Russian task group had passed below the 62nd parallel,
meaning it was fair game for the Scotland based strike aircraft.

The strike package suffered from some serious weaknesses. The Buccaneers
carried the Sea Eagle sea-skimming missile, which far outranged any of
the defensive systems carried by the Soviet ships, but there were only
sixteen of the missiles available. The rest of the Buccaneers were armed
with either Martel anti-radiation missiles or dumb bombs. The squadron
of Jaguars, following behind, was armed entirely with unguided ordnance,
a mix of dumb bombs and 70mm rockets. There were no electronic warfare
planes in the package, they all being committed to the fighting in
Norway and Germany.

The plan of attack was for the Martel-armed Buccaneers to approach to
just outside the maximum range of the Soviet SAMs. Then the Sea Eagle
armed Bucanneer drivers would loose their missiles in a concentrated
salvo against the Russian flagship. As the Soviets lit off their
defensive radars, the first group of strike pilots engage them with the
Martels, which, with a 300-pound warhead, were potently destructive
weapons in their own right. The Jaguars would then sweep in to clean up
the survivors.

The Buccaneers swept in at the flank of the Soviet formation from the
southeast. The airspace above the formation had already been cleared of
the solitary Soviet fighter aloft, an unlucky Yak-38, by a sweep of
Tornadoes whose pilots had engaged the aircraft from beyond the reach of
the Soviet SAMs. On an order from the strike commander, sixteen Sea
Eagle missiles dropped from their mounts, their engines ignited, and the
dropped to wavetop level to speed towards the flattop.

As the missiles crossed into the Soviets’ engagement envelope the
Russian crews began to turn on their radars. Defensive missiles left
launchers on the Russians ships atop fiery contrail in the grey morning
light, and the SEAD Buccaneers responded by launching their supersonic
Martels.

The NATO attack suffered from the fact that the Martels had to be
programmed before takeoff for the type of radar they would engage. This
made the SEAD effort uncoordinated at Buccaneer pilots maneuvered to try
to get a shot at ‘their’ radar. In the time it took them to do so one
Sea Eagle after another was shot down by SA-N-9s launched by *Baku* and
her escorting *Udaloy*-class destroyer. The weight of the NAT O salvo
just wasn’t heavy enough, and the last Sea Eagle blew apart more than
three miles from the *Baku*, its target, allowing the Russian crews to
concentrate their fire on the Martels approaching several ships from
multiple vectors.

These more difficult targets were also engaged effectively, but now the
Soviets were running out of their ready supply of defensive missiles.
Switching off their radars and ringing up flank speed saved several of
the escorts from damage, but not all. Three missiles dove into the
*Udaloy* and exploded, starting fires that quickly raged out of control.
Two more struck the nearest *Krivak*-class frigate’s fantail, blowing
shrapnel into the ship’s engine room and causing damage to one of her
shafts. Even so, the results of the strike were disappointing, the
Soviet defenses in daylight and in the absence of electronic jamming
were surprisingly effective. The British strike commander decided to
call off the second stage of the attack by his remaining Buccaneers and
Jaguars, lacking as they were in stand-off ordnance. The British pilots
turned south, frustrated.

The commander of TG *Invincible*, too, decided that discretion was the
better part of valor and that the safeguarding of his carrier at this
point in the war was a better option than recklessly flinging his ships
against a Russian task group that was well-endowed with standoff
anti-ship missiles and that could be supported at any time by
missile-armed bombers. *Invincible* and her escorts turned south. At the
same time the Russian commander of the *Baku* group, who had kept his
force on a steady course for the Faroes until this point, ordered his
ships to turn north and disengage as well.

TG *De Ruyter* did get some measure of revenge for the losses they had
suffered. The two ships of the task group detached from the *Invincible*
and sprinted north for a couple of hours until they were in range of the
two stricken Soviet ships, which were themselves struggling to keep up
with their withdrawing task group. The NATO crews fired two Harpoons
each, which skimmed northward. The Soviet crews, focused on fighting the
fires and flooding in their damaged vessels, never even saw the missiles
coming. Their first indication that they were under attack was the
detonation of the first Harpoon’s thousand-pound warhead as it plowed
into the fantail of the *Udaloy*. Three more explosions followed in
quick succession.

Both Soviet ships were now wrecks, and the captains ordered abandon
ship. The sailors of TG *De Ruyter* had at least been avenged. Now the
Dutch survivors turned back south for the protection of the Royal Navy.

The Battle of the Shetlands and Faroes had checked the Soviet southward
advance. While the NATO forces had failed to inflict crippling losses on
the Red Banner Northern Fleet, they had managed to check its advance.
This was important, as it would be another several days before the
Americans could bring more than one of their own carriers to bear in the
theater. Moreover, the *Kuznetsov*’s air group had been severely
depleted and an attempt to land Soviet Naval infantry in the islands had
been soundly defeated. The Paras were now entrenched and there would be
very little the Soviets could do at this point to dig them out.
