**Pacific Fury \#1 – Bolt from the Blue**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by maverick3320, Sept
2021</span>**

Ouch.  
  
Having played through the Med Fury and Caribbean Fury series I'm
starting to learn that when Gunner98's opening intel is extremely
limited and the scenario briefing concludes with, "What could go wrong?"
that pretty much everything will go wrong, but wow. Not too far into the
scenario I lost my first carrier, and it wasn't even close. the CV (and
the rest of the TF) was obliterated, so soon that I was still receiving
scenario messages for the Indy after she was already at the bottom of
the Sea of Japan\!  
  
The scenario starts with the *Independence *on the west side of Japan,
with the CGN *California *and a DD/FFG escort. A *Leahy *CG is running
north quickly to join up with the group (No *Ticonderoga* CG anywhere to
be found...not good). The goal is to meet up with an *Underwood *FFG
further north, and eventually, an oiler and another FFG. US /assets in
the AO are fairly limited; some USAF F-15s a few hundred miles away,
some Marine F-18s down in the south of Japan, and some F16s north up at
Misawa AB. Most of the airframes aren't ready when the scenario starts,
and almost all are distant enough to make a close CAP difficult. AWACs,
ELINT, and Jammers are on hand in limited quantities, just enough to
setup missions to have one frame of each in the air. The Indy has a full
complement of F14s and F18s, but many have peacetime loadouts and/or
delayed ready times. Soviet /assets are heavy; at least 10-12 jammers are
visible, along with dozens of front-line interceptors (Su-27Ps and
Mig-31Bs) and airbases all over the Vladivostok area. Japan is friendly
and is running CAPs, but their Sparrows end up not being much of a match
for the Su-27 and especially the Mig-31 missiles. Further, the Japanese
CAPs end up firing an awful lot of their Sparrows at ASMs/anti-radar
missiles that are faster than the Sparrows themselves.  
  
Before hostilities officially breakout a salvo (15-20ish?) Shipwrecks
are fired and start heading toward the CVBG; between the limited CAP
with Sparrows and the CVBG SAMs all of them are handled. Later another
15-20 are fired from another location in the Sea of Japan, and here I'm
not so lucky; *Leahy *(which had since caught up with the CVBG) takes a
missile and simply disappears with no fanfare.  
  
From there all hell breaks loose. Dozens of Soviet aircraft attack;
first come the front-line air in a massive fighter sweep that tackles my
CAP, leaving the ships exposed to deal with what looked like 30+ Badgers
followed by 20+ Fencers. The *California *actually did a surprising job
defending the group, at least until she caught a Kitchen and likewise
disappeared. After that the *Indy *took three hits in the first wave,
which disabled flight ops. With no CAP left and no SAMs a fourth Kitchen
sealed *Indy's *fate.  
  
I thought I remember reading AARs or play testers describe this scenario
and discussing how they kept *Indy *alive; if so, I'd love to hear it.
Even after "paying" 25 VP for additional F15s and F4s my CAP was
exhausted and the entire CVBG gone before the Fencers could even
attack.  
  
Halfway through the 24 hour scenario things have now stabilized (at a
score of around -1500 points). A C-141 with 200 AMRAAMs arrived in the
south of Japan; combined with the eight F-15Cs I had rebased there, I'm
starting to take to the offensive in the air. I'm probably preaching to
the choir here but AMRAAMs are a game-changer. My F-18s and F-15Cs with
Sparrows could possibly get a 1:1 K/D ratio against the Su-27s and
Mig-31s with a lot of work, but with AMRAAMs my K:D ratio is closer to
12 or even 15:1.  
  
As always, good work by Bart and good fun. I thought I read that one of
the Pacific Fury scenarios was playable as Warsaw Pact, so I'm looking
forward to the rest of the series.
