**Northern Fury â€“ Anvil**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by AndrewJ July 2017</span>**

I finished up the 1.1 version today, so here's how it went.

**Pre-game prep**

Looking things over at the start of the scenario it seemed there was a
mismatch between my tactical situation and goals and the aircraft
loadouts, so I went through and made a number of changes in the editor.
For example, I'm approaching a hostile shore with multiple enemy
airbases that include enemy fighters with long-range missiles (Su-27,
Mig-25, and the deadly Mig-31) all sheltering in a dense overlapping SAM
belt, but large numbers of the Vinson's F-14s are set up with weaker AA
loadouts, or air-to-ground or utility loadouts. I think in this
situation establishing immediate air superiority would be the absolute
priority. Therefore, with the exception of a couple TARPs birds, these
are all switched over to air-to-air loadouts (about 50/50 Phoenix Heavy
and Phoenix+ Light).

The loadouts I lost doing this don't seem to be particularly high value.
By this point in the campaign TALDs are well known to be ineffective
(due to the WP doctrine setting requiring an ID before shooting) so I
doubt they'd be loaded. Similarly, the deadliness of the Pact's
low-level air defences has been amply demonstrated by this time, so
having half the very best interceptors (my F-14Ds) set up with iron bomb
loadouts (most of which are too light to do any damage to my assigned
targets) seems unproductive and invites the loss of these valuable
aircraft to no effect. The same is true for lightweight LGB loadouts on
some attack planes, which would require me to get too close to the air
defences yet be unable to damage the targets if they survive long enough
to attack. These are swapped out for 2000 lb BLU-109 warheads instead,
for use only after the air defences are down.

I'm not sure if these loadouts were intended to represent a disorganized
air wing emerging from a mixed mid-level conflict (in which case sorry
for changing them). Looking at the position on the map it seemed that
the carriers just came up from the security of English waters, so I
figured they probably had time to have optimized their loadouts more for
the task at hand, while standing down for rest in a less intense threat
environment.

**The Plan**

I have two separate CVBGs at the moment, and I'm reasonably confident
they can handle airborne missile threats, but it's ASW which has me
concerned. Therefore, the two groups will sail together to tighten
formation and merge behind a concentrated ASW screen, and head due East
for the coast. The two long-range cruisers will dash ahead to act as a
submarine lure and SAM trap in the event of strikes from the Bodo
direction. Initial strikes will be carried out against Bodo, and
subsequently against the Evenes/Andoya/Bardufoss area. I would really
like to take out Bardufoss, with its more advanced aircraft, but I
suspect I can't reach it effectively. After heading east for half a day
the carriers will turn north and head for their objective area as
strikes continue. Although not stated in the briefing, I am aware of the
possibility of bomber attack hooking around and possibly coming in from
the NW, so I make sure to keep one of my AEW far to the north to keep an
eye in that direction. My subs will quietly stick up their ESM masts
until enough aircraft are on station to fill the role, and then move to
the carrier objective area to make sure it's clear of enemy threats.

**The Actual**

The merge of the two groups proceeds according to plan, and ESM and AEW
planes spread out to their stations. Tankers lift off from England and
head north, to support the initial strike, and I hoped for some initial
calm while they did so. However, the Soviets are soon pressing outwards
significant numbers of aircraft from the northern bases, and some of
them are moving at high speed, presumably to tackle my surveillance
aircraft. This prompts a reasonably strong response from me, which
arrives to find most of the enemy aircraft retiring NW again. Puzzled,
we engage in some skirmishing, but there is no decisive result yet, so
the aircraft are sent down to Bodo instead. There the Phoenix range
advantage is essential for taking down the more advanced enemy fighters,
and reaching deep into the enemy SAM envelope to take down the
Mainstays. In a few hours there are no further aircraft rising up from
Bodo in response to my provocations.

My first strike at Bodo is heavy, taking virtually everything which can
fly, leaving only a small air guard for the carriers. Nothing comes up
from Bodo to challenge the strike, which proceeds according to plan.
TLAMs (abut a quarter of my stock) arrive to target the runways, etc.,
sneaking up overland through valleys from the south, and then flying
down the fjord to attack Bodo from the east. The army gets a few on the
way in, and the remainder are mostly shot down by the Bodo defences
(essentially acting like TALDs), but while they are being shot at the
HARMs manage to take down many of the SAMs, and then I can try to use
Mavericks and Skippers to eliminate damaged or reloading air-defence
systems. This works reasonably well, although I learn that A-6s just
don't have the agility for SAM dodging, and I lose several of them when
they get too close to the northern SA-12. Nonetheless I do manage to
shut down the local air defences, and then the F-18s with heavy LGBs
move in to close the runways.

As the strike retired the fighters, which had been keeping a vigilant
eye for any interference from Bardufoss' direction, were sent north with
the tankers, and managed to do good work on the Mig-23 fleet up as far
north as Andoya and Tromso. A few planes even managed to kill some of
the jammers operating out of Banak before retiring in good order. During
the reloading period I made several attempts to provoke a response from
fighters in Bardufoss, expecting more Mig-31s to intercept me, but
nothing happened. With the fighter situation reasonably benign the TARPs
birds and ESM tried to localise the SAMs in the Evenes area, getting a
good idea of a few of them by sneaking at low level through the fjords
and island channels. The Boston contributed by using its TLAMs to
'proof' flight routes, while ESM listened for the radars of any SAMs
trying to shoot them down. Eventually the last four of its TLAMs were
sent by a torturous route through the islands, and then hooking around a
mountain to strike the Archangel HQ from the east before SAMs could
respond.

The next strike came shortly after dusk and concentrated on Andoya. I
had wanted to get Evenes/Bardufoss more, but they were too densely
guarded, and the Andoya SAMs limited my options in attacking them.
Andoya itself was more isolated, so I elected to take it first. The
attack pattern was similar to that at Bodo (being more careful to keep
A-6s at a safe distance, and to use jammers for better effect), and the
airfield was destroyed.

Once again, there had been no significant enemy fighter presence, so my
fighters were sent up the coast en-masse. The remaining Tromso fighters
were dealt with and the main force approached Banak and dealt with the
Mig-23/25/31s there. (They may be older, but those very long-range IR
AAMs on the Mig-25s can be a real problem. You can't rely on turning
away the enemy fighter or killing it to save you from its missiles once
they're launched.) As that was coming to a successful conclusion, and
congratulations were being radioed around, a huge wave of Mach 2+
contacts was seen coming in from the Russian bases further east. Up to
this point I'd been trying to husband my Phoenixes, but in this case it
was shoot-shoot-shoot, to try and deal with these high-value high-speed
targets. There was no attempt to wait and use Sparrows here\! My wave
met their wave, and in this case long range and active AAMs was
everything. I could continuously fall back under the pressure, and was
able to stay clear of almost all their shots while taking a heavy toll
in return. A very profitable engagement\! (While all this was going on a
few more Mig-23s popped up out of Tromso, which I had mistakenly thought
was empty now, right in the middle of the stream of aircraft going to
and from the main engagement. Fortunately, some F-18s were able to
pounce on them with AMRAAMs before they could do any damage.)

As the Andoya raid retired there were still some A-6s with Maverick
left, and they were put to risky use. The location of the Evenes SA-12
had been identified by spotting SAM launches from it, and it turns out
there is a deep fjord leading almost right to it. Almost within its
minimum range, in fact. The A-6s went scooting along the fjord at
extreme low altitude, before turning, pulling up the mountain and
flashing into view. Mavericks away, then a sudden hard turn (as hard as
an A-6 can) and a desperate dive down into the valley again because the
SA-10 on the next mountain over had just lit up\! The SAMs went roaring
overhead while the damaged SA-12s burned cheerfully. It took a couple of
Maverick strikes to finish the battery off, but the loss of that SA-12
was well worth it, because by this time I was starting to run low on
HARMs.

The next strike, in the hours before dawn, tackled Evenes. With fewer
HARMs available I was relying more on Mavericks and SLAMs for SAM
suppression (Skippers having proven too difficult to use), along with
intense terrain masking in the complicated terrain of the area. The last
of the HARMs were able to deal with the SA-10 and one of the SA-11s,
while SLAMs eventually got the other one, and Mavericks got the local
Ganef. However, when the TLAMs arrived (flying down the fjord from the
north) the SA-15s didn't expend all their missiles on them, which meant
that my Maverick carrying A-6s, which were expecting defenceless
vehicles with empty missile tubes, instead met determined and
disciplined missile fire. Two more losses there... An F-18 might have
terrain masked in time, but not an A-6. Still, in the end the missile
systems and the base were destroyed.

As a footnote, after the heavy Phoenix fight up north, there weren't
enough missiles to arm all my F-14s, so half the F-14Ds were armed with
2,000 lb bombs. In the light of dawn they went to Bodo again, and tried
their hand at iron bombing now that there were no air defences there.
They were able to damage parking spaces, but simply didn't have the
accuracy to do anything meaningful to harder targets.

**Aftermath**

At the end of our assigned time the carrier group was safely inside its
area of operations, accompanied by the two submarines. Thankfully, no
enemy submarines had been found in the area.

Bodo, Evenes, and Andoya all had their runways and taxiways cratered,
and all control towers and hangars destroyed. Some other infrastructure
damage was also done (some HAS destroyed at Andoya, some revetments and
parking spaces in other locations, some minor damage to other hardened
targets). All SAMs in the immediate vicinity of those bases were
destroyed, but Army SAMs and airbase SAMs further north were essentially
intact.

My munitions inventory is depleted in some important respects. I have
1/3 of my TLAMS left, but I am completely out of HARMs on both carriers,
and am down to \~ 12 loads of SLAMs and \~ 6 loads of Mavericks, and 6
of Skippers. I might be able to take down one more airbase if the TLAMs
got through (most likely Tromso, which only has one runway), but I would
not be able to take out the air defences as well, and would probably
lose multiple aircraft if I tried.

The fighter situation is strongly in my favour. Although the Vinson only
has 45 Phoenix left (mostly on fighters already) the Nimitz has 83, and
there are plenty of AMRAAMs and Sparrows to go around. The enemy has
suffered severe casualties and will essentially have to fly in fresh
squadrons to replace their losses. My fighter losses were quite minor,
and although my A-6s took more of a beating than I would like, my F-18s
are essentially unharmed.

So another fine scenario to add to the list. I particularly enjoyed the
attempts to dodge around in the fjords. Thanks for taking the time to
write it up.
