**<u>Northern Fury \#5 – Bardufoss Blues</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, Apr 2021</u>**

Following on from H Hour, this scenario assumes a worse outcome than the
one I achieved. You can only play the NATO side. The Soviets have taken
Banak and are rushing combat and transport aircraft there. NATO forces
are depleted, weary and low on ammo and few reinforcements can be
expected in the short-term. A Soviet amphibious force is on its way
around your seaward flank to seize Trondheim, escorted by powerful
elements of the Red Banner Northern Fleet and your prime objective is to
stop it somehow.

At sea, you have the (re-born) frigates Bergen and Stavanger, plus 12
Norwegian missile boats, a coastguard cutter, two Norwegian diesel subs
and two SSNs (the USS Annapolis and HMS Talent).

Between Trondheim and the Tromso area are an assortment of Norwegian, US
and Dutch fighters, with only a minority having AMRAAM missiles with
decent range. These are backed-up by some AWACS and EW aircraft, some
Orions, a few choppers and some Hercules transports. The latter
represent ground crews at the forward airbases of Bardufoss, Evenes and
Andoya and you are given the choice of trying to evacuate these S, then
winding-down operations, with the caveat that losing a C-130 will cost
lots of points.

Ground forces are on the thin side, with just a few radars and a battery
of NASAMS (land-based AMRAAMs) at Bodo airbase. Many of your aircraft
are being readied over the first couple of hours and a few have Reserve
loadouts. Weapons are in short supply, though this didn’t turn-out to be
as much of a problem as I’d feared.

Against this, the Soviets have massive resources to call-upon. Two
carrier task groups maraud offshore, escorted by numerous cruisers,
destroyers and frigates including Udaloys and Sovremennys. The carriers
have Su-33 Flanker fighters, which appropriately allow the enemy air
force to get around your flank and strike deep into your rear. Several
diesel subs are in-theatre. The Soviet air losses from H Hour have been
replenished and they have brought-up numerous fresh units, including
MiG-31 Foxhound fighters, which have 170nm air search radar, 90nm range
Amos missiles and are some of the fastest aircraft ever built.

With AWACS planes starting aloft, I quickly detected a couple of Soviet
surface action groups moving parallel to the coast and heavily screened
by ASW choppers. Before long, the two carriers and their escorts
appeared, further out to sea, with the convoy following on behind. The
enemy were clearly using their warships as a dragnet to sweep-up any
NATO naval forces in their path. I did what I could to put my ships in
stealthy positions, with the rocky fjord coast for cover. As for the
subs, Annapolis tried to work around the Soviets’ seaward flank, the
Norwegian Utsira and Kinn kept close to shore while Talent steered down
the centre, aiming for the mid-point between the enemy groups.
Hopefully, at least one would slip through to the convoy...and its close
escort.

Just as in H Hour, a Soviet Kilo sub ambushed the Bergen and Stavanger.
She sank the former, but the frigate did at least get-off a Stingray
torpedo in reply and took revenge. This netted me 50 VP, as Bergen
scored nothing for the enemy.

I had decided straightaway to evacuate the forward airbases as quickly
as I could and fight from Bodo and Orland (Trondheim). Ready times meant
that not everything could leave immediately, but I sortied a Hercules
from each base, sending one to Bodo and two to Orland. As many
‘Sidewinder-only’ F-16s and F-5s as possible went with them as close
escort, while the AMRAAM F-16s and Eagles stayed behind to provide CAP.

Presently, a great swarm of Soviet aircraft began to arrive, led by
MiG-23s and supported by Finnish Viggens and Drakens as that country was
coerced into joining the Warsaw Pact. Initial clashes saw an Su-33 and 9
MiG-23s downed for the loss of an Eagle and two F-16s, with the evacuees
getting clear. I used the same tactics as in H Hour and re-based planes
S once out of AMRAAMs.

As the pressure grew, I launched more fighters as they became available
but, with the enemy now all around the forward bases, there was little
scope for manoeuvre in what became a close range dagger-fight. Losses
were high, with 6 Eagles and 7 F-16s going down in this phase for 8
Russian and 10 Finnish fighters. With NATO losses scoring 2 VP to half
that for Warsaw Pact, this was not sustainable. Worse, several
second-line fighters and F-5s were lost trying to evacuate during a
brief lull, only to be cut-off by encroaching carrier fighters near
Bodo. The Soviets then began striking Bardufoss with MiG-27s, using
Kedge missiles.

I’d been lulled into a false sense of security by the range problems the
Russians had suffered during H Hour and was astonished when some
land-based Su-27 Flankers pursued my withdrawing support aircraft all
the way to Orland. With some pretty awful timing, these caught and
destroyed two Hercules, two AWACS and a Falcon jammer just as they were
coming-in to land at Trondheim. At least the lost C-130s cost ‘only’ 6
VP each, which was less than feared. I was suspicious of the Su-27s’
endurance, but some calculations proved that it was legitimate enough. I
can only assume that they were restrained by some kind of Exclusion Zone
at H Hour.

For a while, I tried sortying single Eagles from Bardufoss, hoping to
destroy several enemy aircraft with volleys of AMRAAMs for each loss.
This wasn’t as successful as I’d hoped. Some of this was bad luck – one
Eagle fired six AMRAAMs, had three spoofed on 15% chances, hit two
targets without shooting them down and managed just one kill before
being overwhelmed. On another occasion, I had two AMRAAMs spoofed (same
odds), then couldn’t fire any more despite the sky being full of
targets. Zooming in, I found to my disbelief that the Eagle (Engaged
Offensive and not on Auto-Evade) was flying the wrong way!. Though some
planes did better than this, it wasn’t paying-off and I eventually
decided that I was safer on the ground.

While this was going on, a request arrived from the Navy for help
clearing enemy ASW choppers away from the convoy. Some hope!. I
nevertheless tried to sortie some F-5s and a Sidewinder F-16 from Bodo,
but they struggled to get close due to the presence of Su-33s on CAP,
got fired-at by Gadfly SAMS (25 nm range) on escorting Sovremennys and
botched their attack the one time they caught a Helix. I was lucky to
lose just one plane before giving-up the attempt.

At this point, the Soviets detected the Annapolis, which was fortunate
to evade two helicopter torpedoes and sheered-off NW at Flank, as deep
as possible. The Norwegian Utsira was less lucky and was sunk without
warning, costing 45 VP.

Lurking in the fjords, the Stavanger and two groups of missile boats
came under sudden attack from some Helix B choppers using Spiral
anti-tank missiles. While these did little damage, they did
disproportionate harm to some boats’ systems, taking-out one craft’s
propulsion. This was well worth the loss of three Helixes to Mistral
SAMs from a Soviet point-of-view.

Escorted distantly by Foxhounds, a squadron of Fencer attack planes
struck at Bodo, taking-out three Dutch F-16s and the
previously-evacuated Hercules on the ground (the latter only cost 2 VP
in this case). The NASAMS knocked-down four attackers, but was then
disabled. A Sidewinder F-16 launched and bagged two lingering Fencers,
but a third got on her tail and destroyed her with an Aphid missile.
All-in-all, things were not going well and the score was in negative
territory. All airbases, including Orland, were being locked-down by
powerful swarms of blockading fighters and it was near-suicide just to
take-off.

Meanwhile, HMS Talent had been stealthily slipping through the Russian
naval dragnet at Creep speed, moving as deep as possible and aiming for
the convoy. Around 19:00 on February 14th, she made her intercept. What
followed was the most devastating submarine attack I’ve performed in
Command – and it turned the game on its head.

Even at 944m depth, Trafalgar class SSNs have excellent sensors and
these gave Talent the edge over an Udaloy and her fellow escorts. The
Udaloy and a Sovremenny were between her and the transports and
presented a grave threat, but she had surprise and disembowelled the
pair of them with two Spearfish torpedoes each. A spread of torpedoes
then wrought havoc amongst the amphibious ships, sinking no less than
six Polnochnys and Ropuchas, which score 50 VP each. With the Russians
still reeling, a Kashin destroyer and Krivak II frigate then presented
themselves as targets and soon joined their consorts beneath the waves.
Belatedly, Talent detected the main prize, the big amphibious dock
Mitrofan Moskalenko (Igor Yegov class) and tried to intercept with her
last Tigerfish torpedo, but there were more escorts and the Soviets were
at last beginning to react. An Orlan torpedo appeared, but it had
clearly been launched at optimistic range and a turn away at Flank took
Talent well clear. Withdrawing to a safe distance, the sub rose briefly
to periscope depth and loosed her four Harpoons at the now imprecise
location of the Mitrofan, but the Russians parried the attack with SAMs.
With a chopper and a May patrol plane too close for comfort, the SSN
dove deep and sped away, successfully leaving the area of operations
with Victoria Crosses in mind. The score was now +387.

The only downside was that no Soviet ships had been left damaged, so the
Mitrofan and her two surviving companion transports could continue at 18
knots towards Trondheim. With air operations out of the question, I
ordered Annapolis to turn and come-in from the NW, while also letting
the Norwegian missile boats and Stavanger off the leash from the
opposite direction. Some of the Norwegians were unable to participate
due to damage from the chopper strike. I kept my radars dark and spread
the boats out into a search fan (detaching them all from their pre-set
groups), aiming to cut the convoy’s course while avoiding having all my
eggs in one basket. By now, the advance Soviet SAGs had gone well past
the Lofotens, so the risk from them was greatly reduced. I was well
aware, though, that just one Sovremenny had the firepower to make a
nasty mess of my flotilla.

Almost immediately, the Southern group of missile boats detected a
Soviet submarine, probably a Foxtrot. Fortunately, they had a choice
between going N of the Lofotens towards the sub or round the S side and
took the latter. The Norwegian sub Kinn was nearby and I detailed her to
search for the Foxtrot. Kinn was helped by two missile boats which
couldn’t join the attack group (one was limping and the other had
ludicrously begun the scenario on land (!) and couldn’t move (Arg and
Odd both have this problem). They could nevertheless detect emissions
from the Russian sub, which was foolishly sitting at periscope depth
with radar on. Still more foolishly, she then tried to torpedo the two
stranded boats, only to be thwarted by intervening rocks and shoals (I’d
made a similar mistake during H Hour, to be fair). Out of torpedoes, she
was then easy meat for Kinn and scored me another 25 VP.

After a tense wait, the strike force found the convoy, the three
transports escorted by two Sovremennys, a Kresta II cruiser, and a
Krivak II. The Storm-class Rokk made the initial contact and went on to
earn Norway’s highest decoration for valour. Her four Penguins were
swatted out of the air by enemy SAMs, but she steered ahead of the
convoy and engaged the nearest Sovremenny with her 76mm gun. It was like
a falcon attacking an eagle, but her shells raked the destroyer’s upper
works and did extensive systems damage. Puzzlingly, the Russians did not
fire back. Warming to the theme, Rokk tore on and did the same to the
Kresta and Krivak. Brann then came-in from the NE and clobbered the
second Sovremenny in similar fashion.

With the Soviets’ SAM radars compromised, my Penguins were then able to
find targets at will. Their main problem was bad luck, with one boat
seeing all FOUR of her missiles malfunction. Our solitary Snogg-class
boat tried torpedoes but, even against motionless targets, chances to
hit were just 40% (??) and two tinfish managed to miss. Nevertheless, it
was now less of a battle than an execution and the entire Soviet force
was annihilated without getting-off a shot in reply (initial SAMs
apart). The Mitrofan scored a whopping 150 VP as a ‘capital ship’.

I remain mystified at the lack of retaliation from the Russians. It was
an Arctic night in February and my boats were operating without radar
(using infra-red TV for sighting) and were also fast, small and
stealthy. Perhaps the Soviet missiles lacked precise targets and were
then screwed by shells destroying their radars, but they still had guns
(and even the transports carried rockets). I fully expected to lose most
of my force, but ended-up not taking a scratch.

Anyway, after rescuing as many Russians as they could from the freezing
waters, the victorious Norwegians headed-off in the general direction of
Scotland. They were shadowed by Mays and Helixes, one of the latter
getting too close and falling to a Mistral, but no attack materialised
and they got clear. Annapolis also broke-off and disengaged.

Aside from repeated Fencer attacks on Bodo, which achieved little, not
much else happened. The Soviet SAGs duly arrived off Trondheim, but
their amphibious assault plans were left in ruins. The final score was
+821, fed by numerous Soviet aircraft (including three Bison tankers)
suffering ‘operational losses’, much as in H Hour. There are no official
victory levels in this scenario, but it was a comprehensive NATO win.

NATO lost a frigate, sub, 36 fighters, 3 Hercules, 4 support aircraft
and 25 ground elements. Soviet losses came to 9 transports, a cruiser, 5
destroyers and frigates, two subs, 49 fighters, 26 attack planes, 8
support aircraft and 10 choppers. It was hard not to feel some sympathy
for the Finns, most of whom probably wanted no part of this, but their
performance was abject, losing 20 fighters and only firing two
Sidewinders all game.

This is a pretty tough scenario and it could easily have gone a lot
worse, Talent’s intervention being absolutely crucial. On another day,
she might have been intercepted and sunk before getting close.

The next part of the story, Trondheim Express, seems to be a re-run of
this one, only with an even worse starting position. I have to say that
I’m not that enthusiastic about fighting the same battle all over again
and am tempted to skip it and move on to Part 7 at Keflavik (or even
take a break and play something else first). We’ll see a) what Gunner98
says and b) how I’m feeling in a week’s time.
