**Northern Fury 33,** **Into the Night**

10 March 1994, 1300 Zulu, 1500 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf33\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:5.13264in" alt="Navy SEAL Recommended Wet Suits | SEALgrinderPT" />

A massive NATO attack will be going in tomorrow aimed at halting Soviet
plans to seize Oslo. Under the cover of that operation, tonight’s job is
to sneak in and insert several Special Forces teams and link with
Norwegian elements in the Soviet rear area.

During the fast-moving Soviet drive to the south of Norway, many small
pockets of Norwegian soldiers, home guard, loyal citizens and rugged
outdoorsman were left behind. Some have been rounded up and either
incarcerated or killed, some have fled to Sweden, and some have frozen
to death in the rugged mountains. But most have organized themselves
into a very effective force of partisans which have caused significant
disruption in the Soviet rear area. This force is centered on the famous
Telemark Battalion, which was screening for Brigade Nord when the
Soviets bypassed them with airmobile assaults. The battalion simply
headed for the mountains, collected every able-bodied civilian and
straggler they could find and started attacking the Soviets vulnerable
logistics links. After a month of this 'cat and mouse' game,
STRIKFLTLANT has decided that they would be a valuable source of
intelligence and assistance for upcoming operations, and wants to
reinforce them with Special Forces (SOF), communications equipment and
information. To this end your task is to insert several SOF teams into
Norway’s far north. The Soviets wouldn’t suspect a thing!

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf33\image2.png" style="width:6.66667in;height:5.01042in" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#33</u>** is a medium sized but complex scenario
with many risks. An optional mission is to rescue survivors of a wrecked
Norwegian Coast Guard ship, the Nordkapp, a task with several problems
but great reward.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart3\nf33\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33542in" alt="Norwegian Coast Guard Vessel Nordkapp | Håkon Kjøllmoen | Flickr" />
