**<span class="underline">Pacific Fury \#3 â€“ Caught Flat Footed</span>**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by AndrewJ May 2021</span>**

**SITUATION**

As alarming indications of tension rise across the globe, my forces in
the Philippines find themselves somewhat dispersed and in disarray. My
American carrier group, centered on the USS Constellation, is normally a
powerful concentrated fighting force, but at the moment it's dispersed,
weakened, and running low on fuel. The Connie is currently escorted only
by a Tico, a Leahy, and a Spruance. Our second Tico is hurrying to catch
up from the east, our Perry is down south engaged in rescue activity,
and roughly half our fighting aircraft are stuck ashore at Cubi Point on
Subic Bay, temporarily grounded by fuel issues. I also have a pair of
SSNs in the region, which are always welcome, although nobody ever knows
what they're really up to.

Intel informs us that the Soviets have assembled a powerful surface
group north-east of us, based around a core of a Kirov, a Kiev, and a
Slava, plus numerous destroyer escorts. They far outperform us in terms
of anti-shipping punch. Normally we would try to avoid getting this
close to them, but they are already within range, according to our
calculations, and the presence of a tattletale destroyer nearby and a
Bear reconnaissance aircraft overhead mean they already know exactly
where we are. Plus there are at least three Soviet subs in the region,
probably more. All in all, not a pleasant situation to be in\!

We've got another Spruance escorting a pair of oilers up the west coast
of the Philippines, and we've been directed to meet up with them north
of Luzon, and refuel and resupply as soon as we can. They're presumably
safe from the heavy surface group, but the possibility of submarines in
their path is very real. There's also the consideration of interference
from the direction of Vietnam. The extensive Russian facilities at Cam
Ranh Bay are about 660 miles away to the west, across the South China
Sea. That's a bit of a long haul, but not impossible for bombers, so we
can't entirely ignore the threat.

**ORDERS**

Ideally, I could just speed up and run west with the carrier, but that
would leave my lone Tico, the Vincennes, all alone with the enemy group
only a couple hundred miles away, and I'm reluctant to do that. A look
at the charts tells me that I should just barely have enough time to
form up into a single group and still make it to the rendezvous site.
Therefore, the Connie is ordered to turn back east and rush towards the
Vincennes, who will hurry to meet them as soon as it can. Further south,
the Perry is ordered to wrap up rescue operations, and head NW to meet
the carrier in the rendezvous zone. The Miguel Malvar will make a final
rescue sweep when it arrives in the morning.

On the west coast, the replenishment group is ordered to head north
along the coast, but only at creep speed at first, until P-3 patrols
have a chance to proof the route ahead of them. A few of my carrier
aircraft ashore at Cubi Point are already ready, but I'm hesitant to
leave the replenishment group without any air cover (other than
Filippino F-5s). Therefore, the first set of F-14s are ordered to set up
a CAP offshore, until MPA can search the South China Sea and confirm
there aren't any Soviet surprises loitering in the area. The coast-guard
craft in the area is also ordered to head for harbour. If something does
go wrong, it's better for them to be sheltered, rather than caught out
at sea.

It'll take about a day for our forces to meet up and refuel. Hopefully
the world won't collapse before then.

**BRIEF MOMENT OF PEACE**

AEW, ELINT, and MPA start heading out, and it doesn't take long before
the detections start coming in. For the moment it doesn't look like
there's anything off the west coast, which is a relief, although Subic
Bay is full of assorted commercial traffic. The same can't be said about
the Pacific, where we quickly find the Kanin shadowing us to the south
while watching us with her helicopter, plus a pair of snooper ships
further out, one west of us, and one NNE. The Soviet carrier group is on
full display too, or, rather, its aircraft are. Our ES-3 rapidly reports
contacts from their AEW and surface search helicopters, plus air search
radars on their new Yak-141s. The Constellation group skirts around the
Kanin, staying out of its gun range, and starts closing on the
approaching Vincennes.

Things start going sour rapidly. Flash messages tell us the situation in
Europe is on the point of war, and then there's a report that a suicide
truck bomb has destroyed a number of Philippine attack aircraft at Basa.
Orders go out to launch any of our aircraft as soon as they become
ready, just to get them out of the reach of potential sabotage, and the
Philippine F-5s at Cubi are put into the air.

While the big powers move, the little coast guard cutter Antonio Luna is
headed into port to hide from the coming storm. Little do they know,
that this is where the storm is about to begin.

**WAR IN THE PHILIPPINES**

"Sir, gunfire ahead\!" yells the startled lookout, and the crew gapes at
the sight of rockets and guns being fired at the nearby airbase from a
civilian ship in the harbour. "Flank speed" blurts the captain, and the
little ship surges forward, and starts firing as quickly as she can at
the hostile vessels. The crew cheers as the closest enemy bursts into
flames under a storm of autocannon fire, and move on to the next target.
As fast as they can fire, they aren't fast enough, and flames rise from
a burning hangar on shore. The captain can also see what looks like
mortar fire walking across the base, and more fires spread amongst the
parked aircraft.

Personnel on the base start hollering for help, radioing for any sort of
air support to stem the indirect fire, which seems to come from the
hills to the north. It's night, and the F-5s can barely make out
anything on the ground, but they do their best to strafe in the vicinity
of the brief mortar muzzle flashes until the mortar fire ends. Who knows
whether they hit anything or not, but at least the enemy seem to have
been driven away for the moment.

The pilots are feeling pleased with this, until there's a radio report
of explosions at another airbase up north. Planes there were being held
on the ground, in the hope that the attacks were only concentrated
around Subic, but a burning F-5 soon points out that error, and the
remainder are launched as quickly as possible. If they don't use their
weapons they will land at alternate airfields, rather than back at home
base, to try and disperse the /assets until the situation stabilizes.

Back in harbour, a fishing boat trying to flee the chaos vanishes in a
violent explosion, and the warning call goes out that the enemy has
mined the harbour\! The Antonio Luna is trapped in the kettle now. The
crew stare wide-eyed over their gunsights, wondering which of the
seemingly innocuous civilian vessels will try and betray them next.

**WAR AT SEA - HEAVY ASMs INBOUND**

For the carrier group, the first indication of hostilities is the urgent
alert from the E-2. "Vampires inbound\! SSGN\!" There's an Oscar out
there somewhere to the NNW, and he's fired a salvo directly at the
carrier group. Moments later there are more missile warnings: a huge
salvo from their ships at the lone Vincennes, a second salvo from them
at our carrier, and even some shots from what must be a distant Juliett.
Our response is swift, and two Harpoons are fired at the Kanin, sinking
it a few minutes later, while a SAM takes down its helicopter. Every
available plane is being shot off the carrier, and helicopters scramble
from the escorts to get away from the targeted ships.

The carrier planes swoop down into the missile streams, and manage to do
good work, thinning the herd of supersonic sea-skimmers enough that the
cruisers Lake Erie and the Gridley can deal with the rest, with a little
last-minute help from the Spruance. The crew of the lone Vincennes have
no such help, and they can only stare grimly at their scopes as the
missiles bore in. Fortunately, these are high-altitude Sandboxes, not
the sea-skimming Shipwrecks from the Oscar or the Kirov, and they can
engage at maximum range. The SAMs hit missile after missile, but there
are so many that they keep getting closer and closer, and the last one
is only 1 mile out when it explodes. There's a jubilant yell throughout
the CIC. Then the Russians fire again.

A second salvo comes hurtling in from the surface group and the distant
Oscar, and hearts sink. SAM inventories are low now. Can they really do
this twice? Fortunately, there aren't as many missiles in this salvo,
and with help from the last few fighters they manage to destroy the
incoming weapons. The Vincennes is very low on SAMs now, but the
cruisers of the carrier group are in reasonably good condition. Unless
there's a major new threat (bombers from Cam Ranh Bay?) I think we are
probably secure for the moment.

With the missile threat down, my carrier group continues to close on the
Vincennes, hoping to form a single group soon.

**INCOMING AT SUBIC**

Over at Subic Bay, my F-14s which were scrambled from Cubi Point are
orbiting offshore near my replenishment group when they start picking up
a dispersed group of small sea-skimming subsonic contacts headed towards
us. After a moment's puzzlement (Is an SSGN engaging my replenishment
group? How the heck did they spot us?) I realize these must be cruise
missiles, which implies there's either bombers out there, or possibly a
Yankee Notch. MPA radar patrols still show no surface ships out there,
so we know the missiles didn't come from a nearby ship. The F-14s kill a
number of the missiles with guns, and F-5s get the rest.

The F-14s are sent to top up at the tanker, and then all four of them
form up in a wide wall and head west, using their powerful radars to
look for any sign of bombers. They don't see any, but they do find
another wave of incoming missiles, and once again the F-5s knock them
down. The P-3, which was patrolling ahead of the replenishment group, is
sent west to hunt for a sub, but doesn't really have a good place to
start, until the next wave of missiles is spotted radiating out from a
central launch point. Then the hunt is on\! The P-3 hurries in and
quickly identifies and sinks a Yankee Notch near the predicted launch
point, while the F-5s continue to pick off the last of the cruise
missiles before they reach the shore.

Some of the F-5s also manage to get an air-to-air kill. That Bear which
overflew our carrier earlier has escaped, since all my fighters were
busy shooting incoming ASMs, so some of the F-5s are asked to lend a
hand, and they catch it and shoot it down half an hour later.

**HUNTING OSCAR, FINDING JULIETT**

I'd also like to find that Oscar, although the location where I spotted
it missiles is so far away that the odds of finding it there are poor.
Nonetheless, a pair of S-3s are sent out to look for it. As the first
one arrives on station, and drops a couple of buoys, it suddenly gets a
radar hit on a small distant target much further west. It looks very
like a periscope or a snorkel, and its right where the Juliett's
missiles were first spotted.

Actual Juliett, or potential Oscar? Which to choose? I'd really like to
find the Oscar, but I can't ignore a known target, and the S-3 is given
orders to head west. It duly finds and sinks the snorkelling Juliett,
before returning to the Oscar hunt.

My uncertainty about the Oscar's position is enormous by now, and I'm
not even sure if it's heading home for reloads, or advancing to engage
with torpedoes. I split the difference. One S-3 lays a line of sonobuoys
40 miles to the north, and one lays a line 40 miles to the south. They
then climb to high altitude and loiter overhead, waiting and listening
in case the Oscar passes through. A P-3 is also tasked to the hunt, but
it will be some time before it can get there, so the S-3s continue to
wait.

**HARASSING THE ENEMY**

The enemy carrier group is retiring north now, which is annoying. Now
that they've used their heavy ASMs, I'd consider closing with my
cruisers and making a combined Harpoon attack along with aircraft. But
they're opening the range, instead of obligingly closing in, and I don't
have a hope of catching them and making the rendezvous. Reluctantly, I
have to admit they're going to break contact with my ships, and my subs
won't be able to catch them either.

Still, I do have aircraft, and once they've reloaded I send a fighter
sweep to hassle the Yak-141s. I do reasonably well at this, although the
enemy SAMs give them a safe bastion, and my fighters even manage to kill
one of their precious AEW helicopters. In the confusion I lose track of
one of their Forgers, which almost bags the loitering P-3 that's been
monitoring the group. Fortunately the Forgers have short legs, and the
P-3 manages to get away by the narrowest of margins, eventually
returning to loiter at a more discrete distance.

Just as I am completely confident that the enemy ships are not a threat,
one of them starts firing more anti-shipping missiles\! But these head
south, not towards us, and hit a contact I had assumed was some sort of
Russian snooper. Mayday calls reveal that it is actually a commercial
tanker, and it's too far away for me to help it in any way. The retiring
Russians hammer it until it sinks.

**SUB ACTIVITY**

In revenge, orders are give for the San Francisco to come to periscope
depth, and she is passed the coordinates of the actual Soviet AGI out to
my west. A single Harpoon sinks this watcher, and the San Francisco
resumes patrol.

Well, the Russians can play the sub game too. The sonar-man on the
Ingersoll, the Spruance located a few miles ahead of my carrier,
suddenly starts yelling about incoming torpedoes\! As all my ships turn
to run, two ASROCs go roaring down range, and a minute later there's a
thump followed by breakup noises. My ships continue to flee the incoming
torpedoes at flank speed, knowing that they're effectively blind now,
and completely vulnerable if they've bumped into a wolf-pack.
Fortunately, the torpedoes run out of fuel without hitting anybody, and
the carrier group re-organizes itself and gets back on course.

Finally, as their sonobuoys are gradually expiring, the S-3 on the
northern barrier line gets a signal from a passive buoy. Could it be?
Yes\! Oscar\!\! He's heading north, going home for reloads, and now he's
mine. The S-3s swoop in and a series of torpedoes pummel the big sub
until it sinks.

**NEXT STEPS**

As the Russians retire, staff are trying to plan an effective way to hit
them before they're out of reach. Three B-52s loaded with Harpoons are
ready now, but the Russian SAM defences are so heavy that they alone
won't be enough to break in. A few P-3s will be able to join them an
hour or so later, but that probably won't be enough either. If I want
the full power of an all-forces carrier attack I'm going to have to wait
even longer. And that delay will probably mean a less effective daylight
attack. Small night attack, or big day attack? Hmmm...

In the meantime, my ships will continue to head for the rendezvous.
F-14s, now basing at one of the small airfields, will continue to watch
over the replenishment group as it heads north up the coast of Luzon. My
Perry is sprinting and drifting up from the south-east, the SSN San
Francisco is headed in more quietly from the east, and the carrier group
is thundering along, sonars blaring. Only the SSN Corpus Christi is
still moving towards the Soviets, although catching them's a faint hope
unless they turn back for some reason.

Will we be able to bloody the nose of the wily Russians? Time will tell.

Part two\!

**REBELLION\!**

As if a hostile Soviet Union isn't enough, it looks like they're
fostering a rebellion in the southern Philippine islands too\! There's
an encampment down there somewhere, and government asks us for help
finding the targets, so one of our maritime patrol P-3s is sent south to
look around. Its long endurance and FLIR sensor make it ideal for this
sort of work. After some scouting around it finds the rebel encampment
in the mountains of Leyte, and descends for a closer look, hoping to
remain invisible in the dark. The flash of an SA-7 launch proves this is
a risky business, but fortunately the long-ranged shot misses, and the
P-3 ascends to loiter at a safe altitude. It'll stay on-station for
hours, until Philippine attack planes can arrive during the day. (This
feels very like the Middle-East, where P-3s are being used exactly this
way.)

**MOVEMENTS AT SEA**

My ships continue hurrying through the dark waters towards the
rendezvous, slowing from time to time to listen for subs, when the
Ingersoll suddenly gets a hard contact on active sonar. Moments later
torpedoes are inbound on the carrier group again\! It's the same drill
as before, with ASROCs and Mk46s going downrange BOL, while the carrier
group turns away and scatters. Helicopters come clattering in at low
altitude, and manage to find and kill an SSN that's fleeing the area
where the ASROC-dropped torpedo landed. The enemy's torpedoes, deprived
of guidance, go rumbling through the center of my scattering ships, and
fortunately don't hit anyone.

This second close-range ambush of my carrier group is alarming. I have
to average 27 knots to make the rendezvous in time, which means I'm
effectively blind for most of the time. The helicopters I have
patrolling out front clearly aren't enough to reliably find the enemy.
My S-3s and P-3s should theoretically do a good job, except most of them
are being held on the ground. Instead of having them out aggressively
hunting subs, they're loading Harpoons, and planning for an
anti-shipping attack on the retiring Russians. I'm really starting to
question the wisdom of that choice.

Speaking of the Russians, they've altered course NNE, and are moving
about 18 knots now, which means the SSN Corpus Christi could conceivably
catch them. She's been called to periscope depth, given new orders, and
is closing at 25 knots. If we're lucky the Russians will turn even
further, to improve our chance of cutting the corner. My pilots are
continuing to harass them with fighter sweeps, and over the next few
hours they bag a brace of Yaks of all types, a couple of ASW
helicopters, and another AEW helicopter. That makes two, and hopefully
they don't have a third. No AEW will make the upcoming strike a lot more
effective.

**DAYLIGHT COUNTERINSURGENCY**

As daylight comes to the Philippines, a series of attack planes lift off
from the airfields around Manila and head for the rebel encampment in
the mountains of Leyte. First to arrive are the F-5s, dashing in to
suppress the MANPADS groups with rockets. These turn out to be almost
completely ineffective, but the nimble fighters are quick enough to get
out of trouble before the tiny missiles can hit. A few more F-5s hit the
central tent complex with 500lb bombs, which do significantly more
damage.

Next to arrive are some of the little AS-211 Warriors, small jet
trainers with light bomb-loads, and things go poorly for them. They're
nowhere near as fast as the F-5s, and one goes down in flames, while
another staggers away smoking, struggling to recover to the nearest
airfield. Their little 250 lb bombs do almost nothing.

It turns out to be the propellor-driven OV-10s who do the bulk of the
work. Guided by the loitering P-3, they come in from all points of the
compass, simultaneously hitting the SA-7s with a storm of cannon-fire,
rockets, and napalm. They wheel about, confident they've destroyed the
main opposition, and proceed to strafe the remainder of the encampment
mercilessly. That's when an un-spotted SA-7 gunner steps out from behind
a tree and knocks the right engine off one of the diving planes. The
others are far too slow to run away, so they turn desperately to attack,
strafing the area hard. It seems to work, and no further missile fire
comes their way.

More planes eventually arrive to complete the destruction of the camp,
and the P-3 finally flies to the nearby airport to refuel before heading
back to Guam. En-route, the startled sensor operator finds a rebel
mortar unit near the airfield. These are the same sort of guys who
bombarded Cubi Pt, but they've not been attacking. Are they sleeping in?
Maybe they didn't get the memo that the war has started?? In any case, a
few more planes are sent to take care of them, and that seems to be
that.

(The P-3 has been essential here. Without its sustained spotting and
surveillance by FLIR it would have been extremely difficult to spot and
attack the rebels. Casualties to MANPADS would have been much higher.)

**HARPOON ATTACK**

Staff have been assessing options for attacking the retiring Russian
task force, and after rejecting a few options for a series of hasty
night attacks then day attacks, have settled on making one major attack
in the afternoon. The advantage is that we will have as much firepower
as we can muster. The disadvantage is that our planes have a long way to
fly, and there won't be any chance of a second attack.

The Russians have continued heading NNE at 18 knots, and now they're
actually closer to Iwo Jima than to my carrier. According to the
watchful EP-3s which are shadowing them, the enemy formation is screened
by destroyers: Udaloys in front and Sovremennys behind. I should have a
clear shot at the heavies if I come in from the side. Therefore, the
intention is to attack from the SE, on their right flank. The final
strike package consists of three B-52s and five P-3s toting Harpoons
from Guam, while the carrier sends a pair of S-3s and six of my F-18s
with Harpoons, and the remaining eight of the F-18s with HARMs. We
haven't seen any sign of airborne activity since the last fighter sweep,
so we're reasonably confident that we won't need a large fighter escort.
Two flights of F-14s accompany the strike, along with some EA-6 jammers.
Most importantly, a formation of KC-135s set out to loiter south of the
enemy, ready to refuel the planes and send them safely home.

The flight in is uneventful, although the sudden appearance of an ASW
helicopter shows the enemy isn't completely passive. The Harpoon
carriers drop to low altitude, below the horizon, and swing on to their
attack bearings. The HARM carriers drop to medium altitude, ready to
fire and evade low. Even the SSN USS Corpus Christi has come to
periscope depth, ready to add its four missiles to the salvo. Each group
fires at the designated time, and by 12:45 there are 64 Harpoons
inbound, one third headed for the Kiev, and two thirds for the Kirov.
How long before the Russians spot them?

Longer than I expected\! The missiles are almost on top of them before
they react, and by then it's too late. The Slava is in the path of the
missiles headed for the Kirov, and vanishes immediately under multiple
impacts. The bulk of the missiles fly on, and despite her best efforts
the Kirov is overwhelmed too. There's just over half a dozen missiles
left, and they head for the Udaloy I. Two of them get through, crippling
her. Meanwhile HARMs are raining down all over the fleet, contributing
to the chaos and soaking up SAMs. The Kiev is fighting for her life, and
takes five Harpoon hits, plus a few HARMs. The last few missiles from
the S-3s, who were a few miles out of position at the launch, home
remorselessly on the Kiev, but her escorts and her CIWs manage to knock
them down.

**INTERLUDE**

As the smoke settles, my carrier strike aircraft turn for home, tanking
at the waiting KC-135s and proceeding at an economical cruise. They can
see smoke on the horizon behind them, but most of them aren't sure how
well they've done. Still, there haven't been any emergency beepers, so
everyone is cautiously optimistic. The B-52s and most of the P-3s head
back to Guam, but two are detached to head for the carrier to provide
additional ASW screening. (They will land on Luzon to refuel, and fly
back to Guam later.)

Meanwhile, radar operators on the orbiting EP-3 assess the situation in
the enemy task group. The Slava and the Kirov are gone. One of the
Udaloys is limping along at a sorry 6 knots, and the Kiev has drifted to
a halt. It looks like one of the Sovremennys might be a little slowed
too. And are they all coming to a stop, rallying around the striken
Kiev, where my sub can pounce on them? Heck no\! The rotters are
buggering off, leaving the Kiev behind.

The Corpus Christi comes up to periscope depth for another update and
then sets course, ignoring the Kiev for the moment, and hoping to catch
up with the main body of the retiring task group. Meanwhile, flights of
F-14s are sent to loiter in the nearby, along with the tankers and the
watchful EP-3. The Kiev probably can't launch aircraft, but wouldn't it
be embarassing if she did? Best to have somebody on guard...

Over in the west, the carrier group and replenishment group continue to
close on the rendezvous area. My other SSN and the lone Perry are
approaching from the east, sprinting and drifting as they hunt for subs,
while bored F-14 pilots keep on the lookout for pop-up SSGN attacks (or
the remote possibility of interference from Cam Ranh Bay). My
helicopters are sweeping ahead of the carrier, as is an S-3, but I still
don't have great ASW coverage. Since I'm forced to travel at 30 kts, my
big fear is that I will run blindly over an SS. The arrival of those
extra P-3s will be a big help.

**CORPUS CHRISTI**

The Corpus Christi is down below the layer heading north at full speed
again, hoping to catch up with the main body of the task group,
periodically coming to periscope depth to get course updates from the
EP-3. I had hoped the enemy would slow down or turn, but that's not
happening, and time is running out. The navigator and the captain
confer, and agree that if they want to catch the task group and still
have time to deal with the Kiev, then they will have to move faster.
Courses are set, the sub descends, and accelerates to flank speed.
Thirty-two knots, and deaf as a post\! Lord help us if they've got a
screening sub to cover their retreat.

An anxious hour goes by, and the captain gives the order. Cutting to
creep, they ascend cautiously into the layer, and there's the expected
sound signature. One Sovremenny almost two miles ahead, and another
about seven miles ahead. Two Mk48s get fired at each ship, and then the
Corpus Christi ducks back under the layer, cuts the wires, turns around,
and accelerates away at full speed.

Up in the air, the loitering F-14s suddenly pick up airborne contacts,
as multiple ASW helicopters spring into the air from the remaining
ships. The fighters gleefully dive down to attack, and as they do they
see a pair of violent explosions tear a ship in two. They manage to hit
the ASW helicopters, despite some SAM fire, and climb to safe altitude
again. Radar operators on the EP-3 track the other Sovremenny as it
suddenly accelerates to full speed for a few minutes, and then suddenly
stops, and then vanishes from their scopes.

The Corpus Christi clears the area for half an hour, before rising to
get another update from the P-3. Chasing the remaining ships at high
speed is getting increasingly risky, and seems unwise. Instead, she
turns back south-west, first heading for the listing Udaloy, and then
for the drifting Kiev. Both ships are torpedoed and sunk, and the Corpus
Christi cheerfully slips away into the obscurity of the ocean.

**RENDEZVOUS**

Over at the rendezvous zone, my ships are reaching their destination.
The P-3s have laid a comprehensive field of sonobuoys, the San Francisco
and the Perry are creeping around being subtle, and helicopters are
plunking their dipping sonar here and there around the ships.

The F-14s are basing back on the carrier now, and only one S-3, still
undergoing maintenance, is left on shore. Hoses are pumping fuel to the
thirsty ships, and replacement munitions are going across on slings. The
EP-3s are still tracking the last surviving Kara and Udaloy, as they
head north. The sailors' thoughts are turning northward too. They're to
sail for Japan, into the teeth of the Soviet bomber force. They've done
well here, but how well will they do there?

Time will tell.

Thanks again for another highly entertaining scenario.

**Impressions**

This is another challenging fight, with all sorts of interesting things
to do, and a well-coordinated enemy attack to fend off. Having half the
air-group out of place on-shore, and delayed by fuel problems was a very
nice way to temporarily reduce the power of the carrier group. When
things erupted on the ground and in the harbour it was suddenly a very
tense situation, wondering if I was going to be able to get them all off
the ground before they were destroyed by sabotage or enemy fire. (I lost
6 SF.260Ws to the truck bomb, then a KC-135, 2 F-5s, and 3 F-18s to the
gunfire and mortars at Cubi, and another F-5 to the bomb up at Laoag.) I
even started sending long-range planes like the C-141 back to Guam, just
to get them away from potential danger of follow-on attacks.

Getting your carrier safely to the rendezvous is a bit of a trick, and
even though things worked out in the end, I'm not sure I made the right
choices. If I'd headed straight for the rendezvous I'd have needed to
average 20 knots, which would have allowed modestly effective ASW
screening in front of the carrier. Instead, I turned back to meet the
Vincennes, and added about 160 miles to my trip. That suddenly meant I
had to average nearly 30 knots throughout, and that meant almost no
effective ship-based ASW screening at all. It also gave the subs more
time to close on me. I then compounded this difficulty by sending most
of my P-3s away to Guam to load Harpoons, keeping most of my S-3s on
tanker or Harpoon duty, and keeping them all grounded until it was time
to strike. It was thus pure luck that I survived the two sub attacks
en-route.
