**Northern Fury 27 - Out on a Limb**

 28 Feb 1994, 0100 Zulu, 0100 Local

**<u>Global Situation</u>**

The new global war between the Soviet Bloc and the West has been raging
for two weeks now, NATO is now on the offensive, but the Warsaw Pact is
far from defeated and is still resisting fiercely on Iceland and
threatening offensive operations in Norway. The ground war in Europe
continues to be brutal and deadly, Berlin has fallen but the Germans
continue to govern from the old West German facilities in Bonn. North
American ‘REFORGER’ reinforcements continue to arrive in Europe. The
immediate reinforcement to Europe of the 24<sup>th</sup> Infantry
Division (24 ID) and 3<sup>rd</sup> Armored Cavalry Regiment in the
first week of the war was quickly followed by the deployment of III US
Corps complete (1 ID, 1 Cav D, 2 AD, 4 ID, 5 ID & Corps Troops) which
has largely deployed and is forming in Germany. Meanwhile, the
101<sup>st</sup> Air Assault Division has deployed to Egypt to stabilize
the situation there and the 82<sup>nd</sup> Airborne Division, which up
to now has been the US Strategic Reserve, will soon deploy to Sicily as
the Operational Reserve in Europe. 10<sup>th</sup> Mountain Division is
now the Strategic reserve as I Corps has deployed to the Pacific
(9<sup>th</sup> Lt Division was enroute to Europe and re-directed to the
Philippines when that was threatened, and has now been reinforced by 7
ID)

Aircraft losses in central Europe count in the thousands, troops in the
tens of thousands on both sides. Globally, several hundred vessels have
been sunk. Conflicts in the Caribbean, Mediterranean, Persian Gulf and
Indian Ocean have stabilized, generally in NATO’s favour; both the
Panama and Suez Canals remain open and navigable. In the Pacific,
7<sup>th</sup> Fleet has opened a corridor to the Philippines and Taiwan
and contesting the Soviet grip on the waters around Japan. South Korea
is still under constant air threat and naval blockade, an attempt to run
a convoy with some supply and reinforcements to Busan is being
contemplated. USS Constellation will retire to San Diego after
sustaining heavy losses amongst her air group.

Strike Fleet Atlantic (STRIKFLTLANT) has successfully landed forces on
Iceland, Air and Maritime superiority around Iceland is in hand. 2 MEF
is now in the process of defeating Soviet forces on Iceland,
8<sup>th</sup> Marines have invested Keflavik/Reykjavik while
6<sup>th</sup> Marines is clearing the remainder of the island.
Meanwhile in Norway the Soviets seem to have stopped their assault. With
the main Soviet force on the North side of the Trondheimsfjorden, and
the Norwegians defending south of that major water feature, the
situation is secure enough that the British Commando Bde has been
withdrawn in preparation for future operation. The Air Forces in Norway
are sparing daily as more and more force is added on both sides. Access
to the bases in North Norway however have given the Soviets a major
advantage for positioning long range air elements and basing of
submarines.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf27\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.91806in" alt="Carrier USS Dwight D. Eisenhower Underway Ahead of Double-Pump Deployment - USNI News" />

**<u>Scenario situation</u>**:

You, as **Commander of the USS Eisenhower CVBG** have been directed to
position yourself between Norway and Iceland to ensure there is no
Soviet interference with the ongoing operations to seize the Island and
establish a firm base for upcoming operations.

Your CVBG has been in constant operations since the start of the war.
Fighting off a Soviet move in the Med, assisting in the defeat of the
Libyan Air Force and sinking two submarines, you were then tasked with
deploying to the North Atlantic. After a relatively quiet two-day
transit towards Gibraltar, you entered the Atlantic 9 days ago and were
immediately assailed by heavy submarine and then air activity. The past
five days has been hectic as you and the USS Carl Vinson have focused on
suppressing defences on Iceland. Yesterday you left that task behind as
the amphibious operation was culminating and the task of supporting the
Marines was left to the USS Carl Vinson and the USS Theodore Roosevelt.
Your carrier has not been in port since a week before the war started,
however most of your Battle Group had a chance to rearm while leaving
the Med. It has been 4 days since you have replenished, and your stocks
of ammunition and aviation fuel are starting to dwindle.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf27\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.65625in" alt="The story of the formation of 75 Tu-16 Badger bombers that avoided collision after flying through thick clouds at 990ft during the May Day Parade in Red Square - The Aviation Geek Club" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#27</u>** visits the classic dilemma, often
experienced during the Pacific campaign in World War Two, of how best to
use naval air power during an amphibious operation. Many advocates of
carrier air power state that the best place for a carrier is well beyond
the close objective, which is being pummeled by ground and bombardment
forces anyway. The idea is that the best way an opponent can interfere
with an amphibious operation is from bases that have not yet been
attacked, and carriers should be either interdicting that, or attacking
those bases. However, the USN’s sea dominance in the North Atlantic
during this operation is far less than it was in the Pacific during
1945.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf27\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.28125in" alt="Sierra-class submarine - Wikipedia" />
