**Caribbean Fury \#4 – Show of Force**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Nov 2020</u>**

**Playthrough**

I started out by ferrying my Florida F-16s and a few tankers down to
Martinique, to form a rapid-response and CAP force for the upcoming
strike. While that was going on, a lone EP-3 started flying up and down
the Venezuelan coast, to see what it could find. This provoked an escort
from some Mirages, but no other hostile response, and the EP-3 was able
to identify the patrolling frigates and plot the positions of some
radars and the SAMs defending the Guiria naval base. Just after dusk,
the SR-71 went zipping along the north coast, but didn’t find anything
new. (Saves show the Blackbird was easily picked up on Venezuelan
radar.)

The attack formed up off the coast of Guyana, outside Venezuelan radar
cover, with F-16s loitering to cover a major tanker formation, where the
F-117s all lined up to refuel. The attack went in through Guyanese
airspace (although State denies this, if anyone bothers to ask), before
turning and approaching the target from the SSE, as far from Venezuelan
radars as possible. The B-2 went in first, hitting the airfield, and
then the F-117s followed up, hoping that nothing survived on the ground
to pop up and intercept them.

All seemed to go well. Although I wrecked two airliners parked near the
Bears, and blew in the windows of many of the small hangars on the main
flight line, none of them collapsed and fell over, so the Venezuelan
government was able to grit its teeth and look the other way.

**Impressions**

Timing is the main thing in this one, and planning the long flight paths
so everything arrives at the right time can be a little tricky. (This
scenario is the sort which could really shine with a mission planner
function.) However, once the player gets things rolling, there’s not
much in the way of resistance, unless he tries to go through the
Venezuelan forces, rather than around them. (It seems only stealth
aircraft trigger hostilities - a conventional incursion would be ignored
unless it is observed to drop bombs?)

I was a bit surprised to see so many stealth aircraft present here. I
had assumed all the F-117s would be in England, or headed there ASAP, to
butt heads with the Pact in Europe. I can see the B-2s still being at
home, although I wonder if they would all be sitting pad-ready with
nukes. Still, this would be a strategically valuable outcome,
stabilizing the southern flank, so it makes sense to use one.
