**<u>Northern Fury \#8 – Plug the Gap</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, June 2021</u>**

For the purposes of this scenario, the Soviets have made a
partially-successful landing at Trondheim, Narvik has fallen and the
Norwegians are falling back in that sector. Meanwhile, a British task
group centred on the carrier Invincible is heading N from the Clyde to
cover a paratroop reinforcement of the Shetland and Faroe Islands, as
well as evacuations of civilians from both territories. Soviet
intentions in the region are uncertain.

Note that there is a slight problem with the scenario in that a Soviet
ASW Mission has had its area improperly-defined. It has little effect on
play, but maybe gives your one sub an easier time than she should have.

Invincible starts SW of the Faroes, escorted by three destroyers and
four frigates, which collectively provide a decent SAM defence.
Offensive capability is modest, with a small number of Harpoons on two
frigates and some aircraft with Sea Eagle missiles. The task group has
eight Sea Harriers with AMRAAMs for CAP and plenty of ASW, AEW and SAR
choppers.

To the SE of the Shetlands is a European SAG, with four frigates (two
Dutch, one Danish and one German). They have Harpoons, but their air-
and submarine-defence capabilities do not inspire confidence. There is
also a weak Danish frigate, the Hvidbjornen (Polar Bear) off the Faroes.

HMS Turbulent, a Trafalgar-class SSN, is cruising to the N of the
islands, acutely aware of being in harm’s way.

The Scottish airbases at Lossiemouth and Leuchars house a useful mix of
aircraft. There are Buccaneer strike planes (mostly fitted with Sea
Eagles), Nimrod patrol planes, Sentry AEW aircraft and VC-10 tankers at
the former, as well as some Jaguar attack planes which only carry bombs
and rockets and are best kept out of the way. At Leuchars, you have a
squadron of 11 Tornadoes, which have Sky Flash SARH missiles – these
slightly outrange the Russian Alamo but share its weakness of needing to
watch the shot onto the target when you’d rather be getting clear. At
least they start with Auto Evade off. There are also some older
Phantoms, which carry a shorter-ranged version of the Sky Flash and are
best employed against bombers and other weaker targets.

There isn’t much in the way of defences on land, beyond a few radars, so
you are very dependent on a squadron of Hercules transports based at
Brize Norton in Oxfordshire, which are due to convey paras to the
islands under AI control at some point in the scenario. You need to
ensure that this run is protected, as well as trying to cover four
ferries and ten civilian aircraft which are engaged in evacuating those
islanders who’ve opted to flee the war zone.

As is my usual approach, I deleted most of the pre-assigned missions,
apart from the civilian evacuations and created my own ASW patrols over
the two naval squadrons. I kept my ships’ radars dark and, given the
range advantage enjoyed by my Tornadoes, opted for Active EMCON for the
fighters. Turbulent was ordered to get away to the S, but slowly in view
of the Soviet submarine threat. Similarly, I felt it best to limit all
warships to Creep speed to limit the danger of ambushes.

I soon realised that there was an exclusion zone NW of the Faroes, no
doubt intended to separate the AOE from that of the Keflavik Capers
scenario. This hindered interception of some Soviet Badger recon planes,
which hid behind it.

The Russians began by mounting airstrikes against radar installations,
using Blinder and Backfire bombers from a distance. I managed to
preserve the two foremost radars in the N of the island chains by the
simple expedient of turning them off, so that the ARMs missed, but was
less careful with some further S and lost them. CAP engaged the bombers
it could reach and ongoing clashes saw 4 Blinders, 3 Backfires, a Bear
recon and 4 Freestyles downed for the loss of a Harrier, with little
attempt to intervene from the Su-33 Flankers flying CAP for their
carriers. Enemy missiles destroyed a civilian plane on the ground which,
like all other NATO air losses, cost me 5 VP (most Soviet planes score
two, but bombers and recon types are worth seven apiece). Installations
on the Shetlands were largely undamaged, but the runway at Vagar airport
on the Faroes was effectively wrecked and two evacuation flights were
unable to take-off for the rest of the game.

Meanwhile, an enemy sub torpedoed and sank the helpless ferry Hamnavoe W
of the Shetlands, which cost a sharp 50 VP. I detailed a Nimrod to hunt
for the culprit (a Foxtrot) and she eventually took some revenge for 15
VP.

Aware that I’d need to establish air superiority if the paradrop was to
work, I took an aggressive approach to the Flanker threat and sent a
pair of Tornadoes against the Russian CAP, splitting them up to reduce
the risk while sowing Sky Flashes amongst the enemy. This yielded 3
Su-33s, a pair of Yak-38 Forgers and a Helix AEW chopper for the loss of
one Tornado. The flight also discovered a Soviet naval squadron
approaching from the NE. A second Tornado-Flanker duel cost each side a
plane, which was less good. The second Tornado in this flight broke-off
and accounted for an annoying Badger EW plane, reducing the amount of
Soviet jamming.

By 1am, all civilian flights that could had left the islands and, like
the other three ferries, all reached safety.

I’d been concerned for some time about four or five apparent ‘merchant
vessels’ approaching the islands in advance of the Soviet fleet.
Suspecting foul play, I scrambled four Buccaneers and had them on
standby. When nothing happened and the planes’ endurance began to wane,
I sent them against the Soviet fleet and they managed to sink a Krivak
II ASW frigate for 15 VP.

My suspicions that something might be afoot were realised when enemy
radio transmissions were intercepted indicating that the merchantmen
might be carrying Pomornik hovercraft loaded with troops and amphibious
tanks. Sure enough, four of the craft were then detected disembarking
from two imposters, a pair heading for each island group. To be honest,
it was a rather desperate ploy, especially given the lack of fighter
escort provided. All four Pomorniks were summarily blown out of the
water by Sea Eagles from Buccaneers and Invincible’s attack Harriers.
This scored 100 VP and put me in a very strong position to win the game.

The Russian response was to send a squadron of Su-33s to blockade the
Faroes and one of Forgers to close-down the Shetlands. Clearly, this
couldn’t be tolerated and I was obliged to risk losses to break this
attempted stranglehold. Over the Shetlands, my Phantoms proved more than
a match for the Forgers (rightly described by Bart as a ‘wretched
aircraft’) and cleared-away eight of them for one loss.

It was a predictably hard scrap over the Faroes, with the dozen Flankers
a close match for my Harriers and Tornadoes. The latter’s small range
advantage meant that, if they hit with the first shot, the answering
Alamo would go blind and wide. This slight edge contributed to eight
Su-33s being downed for two Tornadoes and three Harriers, at which point
the surviving Russians went Shotgun and withdrew. It meant a net loss of
9 VP, but was worth it for the strategic gain.

Meanwhile, the paras were taking-off from Brize Norton. As they
approached, air battles continued against some relief Flankers, which
attrited another Tornado and Harrier for three of their number and cost
me another 4 VP. The result was to clear the skies long enough for the
Hercules to arrive and drop the reinforcements safely before
withdrawing. To score points for this, both drops have to succeed, not
just the easier one in the Shetlands and the whole thing scores only 15
VP, but it makes-up (just) for the air losses.

Reinforcing the Faroes triggers a request from the local Danish
authorities for a naval liaison team to be sent to Vagar in a Lynx HAS.3
chopper, which must be maintained in the area for five minutes and
outfitted in Ferry mode (any chopper of this type will suffice).
Inevitably, this task coincided with a fresh Soviet air surge over the
islands. Two Harriers and two Su-33s killed each other, four Freestyles
were downed without loss by Tornadoes and I gained 2 VP.

While this was going on, an Akula SSN popped-up SE of the Invincible
squadron and tried to attack with torpedoes at (considerable) kinematic
range. Forewarned by sonobuoy contact, I was able to evade at Flank and
a Nimrod then ensured that the sub had a very bad day (15 VP).

As the Lynx approached Vagar, the air battles continued. Five more
Su-33s came-in and destroyed a Tornado, but lost three of their number,
with the survivors breaking-off. Meanwhile, a Phantom picked-off an
incautious Hormone chopper near the Shetlands for a handy 7 VP.

The liaison team duly arrived at Vagar, though it was necessary to
position the chopper directly over the airfield and hover at minimum
altitude before being awarded the modest 5 VP.

Things wound-down after this. I was concerned about a missile attack
from the Soviet fleet and kept my distance, but only their heavier ships
were ever likely to get into range and they lacked the inclination.
There were a couple of false submarine contacts, which resulted in a
shoal of tuna being torpedoed by a Sea King that was set to Weapons
Tight (??), thankfully without costing me any points.

I ignored the few remaining Su-33s and picked-off any weaker aircraft
that presented themselves, downing two Forgers, a Hormone and eight
Helix ASW choppers without loss. Towards the end, I mounted a Buccaneer
and Harrier strike at the Russian fleet, but was unable to get any
missiles past the SAMs.

So it ended in a Triumph with a score of +232. NATO lost a ferry, 14
fighters and a civilian plane, plus 8 ground elements. Soviet losses
came to two subs, a frigate, four hovercraft, 41 fighters and attack
planes, 9 bomber and recon types and 11 choppers.

The Faroes and Shetlands had been saved, but the Soviet offensive
further W was far from over and a major battle was now in prospect to
the W of Iceland.
