**Mediterranean Fury \#4 – Secure the Flank**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Mar 2019</u>**

**THE SITUATION**

A couple of days have passed on the Syrian coast, and it turns out
NATO's past successes have been greatly exaggerated. The Russian fleet
remains a powerful force, the SA-10 belt in Latakia has been
replenished, and the Syrian air defence net is intact. We have been
instructed to conduct strikes against these forces, as well as to get
three vulnerable refueling ships down to the Suez Canal, in order to
re-arm the incoming Nimitz group. The Israeli question hangs in the air
too - can we keep them out of the war?

NATO air-forces in the region have grown, and now include Jordanian
allies, three bases in southern Turkey, one in Egypt, and bases on
Cyprus, Crete, and Sicily. In addition to surviving naval forces
sheltering west of Cyprus, with seriously depleted magazines, I have a
string of naval forces stretching from Cyprus to Sicily, including a
frigate screen, the remains of the Brit carrier group, the Bainbridge
(hurrying in from Spain), French and Italian carrier groups, my command
ship, and finally the distant Eisenhower CVBG.

Unfortunately, I have several constraints on the carriers. High command
doesn't want the Ike to come much further east, and in fact they're
going to order the entire group west, into the Atlantic, in a day or so.
The Ike will be distant support at best. The Italians want their carrier
back ASAP, since things look ominous in the Adriatic, and it will take
considerable political capital to keep it.

I have two days to accomplish my objectives. How to proceed?

**THE PLAN**

The Italian carrier group is excellent, not just for the planes (FLIR
equipped Harriers, superb for finding ground targets), but for the 32
long-range Otomat ASMs they carry. My front-line ships have expended
many of their missiles, and I could make good use of these while staying
outside of Sunburn range. However, they're over 600 miles from the
operating area, and unless I rush them at reckless speed they probably
won't get there in time to contribute unless I wait far too long to
attack. I reluctantly concede to Italian pressure and send them back to
home waters.

My ships near Cyprus will re-organize somewhat. The depleted British
ships will try to dash into Limassol, to stock up on SAMs, while the
rest of the combatants join up with the Iowa group. I could send the
depleted Americans back to Crete for reloads in Souda, but that's so far
away they'd not be back until midway through the last day, and that's
too long. They'll have to stay and fight with depleted magazines until
reinforcements arrive. The Amphibs will break off, with only a Knox to
provide ASW cover, and discretely head west, to get out of enemy radar
cover. Until they do, they remain at risk from the Slava, which we're
told has reloaded.

My frigate screen will break up, with most of them hurrying to join the
Iowa, while the Andromeda heads west to meet up with the Fort Grange.
The Brit group is breaking up, with one of the Type 23s heading back to
the west end of Crete, while the other Type 23 and the Type 22 head for
Port Said. The objective of these ASW ships is to proof the lane the
oilers in Souda will follow on their way to the Suez. I'm worried about
subs in the Aegean, so the oilers will be travelling around the west end
of Crete, meeting up with my command group, and then heading ESE to the
canal, picking up the ASW escorts as the proceed. My remaining ships
(the Type 42 and Bainbridge group) will slow down and wait for the Foch
to catch up, as they all proceed along a P-3 proofed corridor directly
to Cyprus.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf4_aj\media\image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:3.03958in" />

The Ike will steam to the eastern edge of its patrol zone, and
immediately launch a long-range F-14 sweep, enabled by tankers out of
Sigonella, to try and provoke the better enemy fighters to come up and
engage, while picking on support aircraft like Badgers and Fencers
without getting too deep into the SAM umbrella. Then, in the night, the
Ike and Foch will launch a heavy ASM strike, along with the Iowa group,
to try and sink the Russian fleet in one blow. By the time the strikers
are back and reloaded it will almost be time for the Ike to head west. I
may be able to squeeze some extra SEAD activity in, but probably not
another alpha-strike.

My land-based air will primarily concentrate in AA activity at first, to
reduce Syrian and Russian fighter numbers, before trying to tackle their
SAMs directly the following day. As a result, many of the Turkish F-4s
are being ordered to unload their bombs and put their Sparrows back on.
I'm still undecided about the Latakia area. I don't have swarms of TLAMs
to saturate the SA-10 belt, and I don't have an extra day to whittle
down their fighter and SAM stockpiles if I want to combine with the
Ike's Harpoon attack tonight. I don't know if I can pull off another
sweep of all the Latakia defences in one strike. Staff are assigned to
study the issue...

Let's see how long this plan survives the enemy!

The weekend is always better with a little Command. Therefore...

**FEB 16 – FIRST AFTERNOON**

Ships courses are laid in according to the plan, aircraft loadouts are
adjusted, and events get underway. Tankers launch out of Sigonella,
heading east for distant Cyprus, and as the pass the Eisenhower all the
F-14s (except the few remaining behind as CAP) form up to follow them on
their path. The Italian carrier turns back to help in the Adriatic, and
leaves our command for the moment. As the other ships settle down on
their new routes, P-3s start patrolling the lane they are expected to
pass through, and one of them gets a VLAD contact on an SSN of some
sort. It turns out to be a newer Victor, patrolling in the path of the
Foch group, and the P-3 swiftly sinks it with a couple of torpedoes.
Other than that, my western forces proceed uneventfully for the moment.

Things are much more exciting in the east, where Syrian MiG-25s make an
immediate dash to try and pick off my AWACS, but fortunately my fighters
are able to cut it off before it can make the intercept. Radar reports
from the excited AWACS crew suggest that the main Russian fleet seems to
be sticking very close to its base in Latakia, with several units
stationary in the port itself, presumably for missile replenishment.
Combining the point defences of the fleet with the area SAMs in Latakia
means this will be a very tough target. The AWACS crew also report that
the fighter patrols in the area match the pattern from previous days,
with Russian MiG-23MLDs over the ocean, and a combined patrol of Syrian
MiG-21/23/29s a few miles inland. The jammer Fencers are back too. The
ESM operators are also reporting surveillance radar emissions from
multiple SA-5s. The Syrians seem to have the long-range part of their
air-defence net up and operating now, which is forcing my large slow
support aircraft to stay well back from the coast. Even my fighters will
have to be careful of the long-range shots as they approach the
mainland.

While the AWACS is keeping track of things in the upper world, my three
SSNs begin closing in on Latakia, taking the time to make a careful
sonar survey below the waves. The Torbay has the good fortune to make a
sonar detection of a distant SSK, which is somewhat of a surprise given
how quiet those targets can be. Over the next couple of hours it
cautiously stalks its quiet target (which fortunately is travelling
away, so the Torbay is in its baffles to begin with) and sinks the Kilo
with a single torpedo.

**ATTACK ON JORDAN**

My forces include the recently allied Jordanians, and I had assumed
their role in the conflict would be a minor part, primarily bombing some
of the older and more vulnerable Syrian SAM sites. The Syrians disagreed
however, and Jordanian radar began to detect a large strike force
forming up near the Jordanian border, starting with a large number of
MiG-29s, and then an alarming number of slow moving attack planes,
headed for the H5 airbase. Fortunately, the size of the strike meant it
took a while to form up, so the Jordanians had time to scramble their
entire Mirage fleet, as well as the majority of their AAM-armed F-5s,
and poise them to attack. The Mirages met the incoming raid and directed
all their long range missiles (R530s) at the leading Fulcrums, managing
to down enough of them and ruin the attacks of others, so the encounter
went largely in our favour, and the F-5s could plunge into the mass of
incoming Albatros attack planes. Normally F-5s with front-aspect
missiles should absolutely dominate that engagement, but Jordanian
cadets suck! They may be well intentioned, but between fumbling for
switches and getting settings wrong, it took them forever to make
engagements, and they'd often go hurtling past their ‘victims’ before
they could get a missile off. In many cases the Mirages had to circle
back around and come in from the rear with their old rear-aspect Magics
in order to make the interceptions for the cadets. Fortunately, the
slow-moving Albatrosses gave the Jordanians enough time to recover from
their fumbles.

What the pilots couldn’t see was the flock of Scud missiles passing far
overhead, towards their airbase in the rear. National /assets had flashed
launch warnings to high command shortly after the missiles had launched
from central Syria, but the Jordanians had no effective defence against
the incoming missiles. I foolishly ordered a scramble of a few more
F-5s, hoping to get them into the air before the Scuds arrived, but they
were still on the runway access point as the warheads started to impact,
and four of them were destroyed by the fragments hurled by the massive
blasts. Most of the missiles fell among the hardened shelters at the
north-west end of the airport, but none of them took a direct hit, and
the aircraft inside the sturdy structures remained completely unharmed.
I should simply have ridden out the attack in the shelters. A second
wave of missiles a few minutes later threw more dirt around, but did no
damage to essential infrastructure. A few missiles landed near HAWK
sites, but their inaccuracy meant no damage happened there either.
Fortunately, the Syrians don’t seem to have targeted the airbase runway,
or worse yet, one of the airfields on Cyprus. Those have no hardened
shelters, and aircraft damage there would have been severe.

In the aftermath of the attack the Jordanians hurried back to base,
since everything except bomb-armed planes had been launched to defend
against the attack. As the last couple of planes circled to land, one of
my HAWK batteries suddenly reported a visual contact on low-flying
planes only a few miles away. The HAWKs had briefly turned on their
radars during the incoming strike, but hadn’t engaged anything, so their
radars had been shut off again, which is why they didn’t spot the
attackers further out. Frantically hurrying to reactivate the radar, the
HAWK crew managed to shoot down a pair of attackers at extremely close
range, just before the Fitters overflew them with a roar. The crew
cringed, awaiting the blast, but there were no bomb bursts, so the crew
shot down the remaining attackers as they flew away. Later, analysis of
the wreckage showed that the Fitters had been carrying AS-9 ARMs, but by
the time my crew had the radar back on again they were inside the
minimum launch range, and couldn't attack. A lucky break!

**SKIRMISHING**

With that attack over, a number of skirmishing actions begin around the
edges of Syria, as my pilots start trying to attrite the Syrian air
force.

My AMRAAM armed F-16s out of Incirlik make a concerted effort to engage
the Russian MiG-23MLDs based out of Latakia, flying in low and bagging
two dozen of them, as well as making a good score against the MiG-29s
patrolling in NE Syria. The Turkish F-16s also do very well against the
MiG-21s in the Syrian rear, running away from the occasional MiG-25s
which try to spoil their fun. The MiG-25s make several more attempts to
get at the AWACS, and my AEW helicopter over Cyprus. After being chased
for a second time the AWACS takes to bravely hiding behind the Patriot,
so hopefully it’s fairly secure for the moment.

A few Osas venture out of the security of their SAM umbrella, heading in
the direction of Tarsus. A Harrier from Cyprus gets one of them with a
Sea Eagle, while his other missile fails to light its motor and falls
harmlessly into the sea, and the remaining Osas turn about and head back
home.

I’m not the only one shooting at Syrians, and the Israelis use their
SAMs to take some shots at Syrian fighters which get too close to the
border. Every plane is a help, but I hope this doesn’t lead to a wider
conflict.

**ATTACK ON CYPRUS**

The Syrians aren’t content to skirmish, and AWACS starts reporting
another big strike forming up out of Tiyas. We’re seeing the radar
emissions of at least 8 MiG-23MLs, and there are over 40 attack planes
with them, all headed for Larnaca. They aren’t plodding along like
Albatrosses either. These Fitters are 140 knots faster in cruise alone,
and I’ll have less time to catch them as a result. I’ve got a small
hodgepodge of fighters on Cyprus, and I start launching all the ready
birds I still have, but that clearly won’t be enough to stop a strike of
this size.

Fortunately, the cavalry is here. The Eisenhower’s F-14s have just
arrived, having tanked west of Cyprus, and they hurry in to join the
fight. This isn’t why they’re here (they’re supposed to be hunting
support aircraft and high-end fighters), but they’ll do just fine. The
flight boss orders them to preserve Phoenixes wherever possible, but
fortunately they have good long range Sparrows too, and by working with
all the Cypriot planes, they manage to put down the incoming attack
after heavy fighting. This is a success, but after the fighting’s over I
only have one ready Tornado on Cyprus, and a pair of Harriers on the
retiring Kearsarge group. For the next few hours, Cyprus won’t be able
to defend itself from anything big.

**F-14s HUNTING**

Meanwhile, the F-14s regroup and advance, targeting the Badgers
operating out of Damascus, and the jammer Fencers near Latakia, hitting
them with Phoenixes from outside the effective SAM belt. They have to
stay low, to keep out of the SA-5 radar, which eats fuel rapidly, and
once the support planes are gone they head back to Cyprus to refuel.
There are about a dozen Phoenixes left between them, so they return to
the fight once more, hoping to pick on MiG-29s this time. They’re in a
slightly peculiar situation, since they have very powerful missiles on
board, but they don’t want to use them against the nimble MiG-21s which
come up to challenge them, and their smaller missiles were already used
defeating the Fitter raid. Observers now get to watch mighty F-14s
running away from ancient MiG-21s, in order to get help from a pair of
Harriers which still have dogfighting missiles on board. Having been
rescued by their lowly brethren, the F-14s return to engage the MiG-29s,
getting several good kills. After that, it’s back to Cyprus for a final
tank-up, before the long trip back to the carrier in the deepening dusk.
The tankers depart too, heading for Heraklion, rather than Sigonella,
where they will ready to support tonight's attack.

In their wake, the Syrians seem to have lost all their Badger and Fencer
jammers, as well as many of their ASW and targeting helicopters. Unless
they’ve got another radar plane on delayed activation, they should be
blind to my ships’ more distant movements later tonight.

**ATTACK ON TURKEY**

In the middle of the F-14s' back-and-forth raiding, the Syrians launch
their third big strike. This one forms up out of Abu ad Dahur, and heads
north towards the Malatya airbase in Turkey with a cloud of Albatros
attackers escorted by MiG-23s.

Normally the Turks would be well placed to handle this on their own,
since Malatya is the home of the F-4s that did such excellent air-to-air
service in MF \#2, but they're still switching back from bombs to AAMs.
By my calculations, the strike will arrive 11 minutes before the first
of the fighters are ready! I do have one ready flight of F-4s on
intercept duty, but there's a MiG-25 lurking nearby, and I don't want to
take off under his guns. So F-16s come rushing in from the east (with
Sidewinders) and the west (with AMRAAM) to tackle the strike.

AMRAAMs outclass Apex, and the inbound attack is stopped before it can
reach the target, but I'm starting to feel the logistical pressure. The
F-16s at Incirlik are using up their AMRAAMs rapidly, and by the time
dusk rolls around I’ve only got five left in my magazines, plus those
already on my planes. I feel I’ve spent the missiles in high-odds shots
on high-value targets, so hopefully the expenditure will pay off.

**NIGHT FALLS**

It's night now, and the F-14s are passing Crete as they head back to the
carrier, where strike planes are readying for a night attack on the
Russian fleet. The French carrier is doing the same, as are forces at
Incirlik and down in Egypt. It should be quite a party...

---

Hmmm... Welcome to Crete, Mr. Tango. Just checking to see if your papers
are in order. Allow me to stamp your passport with this convenient
Stingray!

---

The weekend brought a little more time for Command, so here’s a quick
update:

**POLITICAL MANEUVERS**

A few hours into the night I’m informed that a political delegation will
be travelling to Israel on Air Force 2. They’re coming from the
direction of Italy, and they’ve asked for an escort to make sure they’ve
arrived safely. Evidently the situation with Israel is quite sensitive,
and they need to conduct face-to-face negotiations. Up ‘til now my F-15s
in Egypt have mostly stayed at home, but now they are tasked with this
mission. One flight heads directly for the incoming airliner, settling
on its wing as escort, and two more flights (and a supporting tanker)
head for the Lebanese coast, just north of Israel. I figure that if the
Syrians attempt to interfere, they will have to come that way, so I can
cut them off long before they can threaten AF 2. Nothing happens,
however, and AF 2 lands uneventfully. Somewhat disappointed, the fighter
pilots fly along the coast and beat up the local Syrian CAP, before
heading home.

**NAVAL ACTIVITY**

My task groups continue on their planned courses through the darkness,
and AWACS keeps a constant eye on the Syrian and WP ships, but they are
all staying close to home in Latakia for the moment. My three SSNs are
slowly closing in on them, taking their time to be discrete, and in the
small hours of the morning the LA starts getting good sonar contacts on
the Krivak which is patrolling off the coast, screening the heavies from
people like me. The LA’s torpedoes have a longer range than the Krivak’s
sonar, and one long-range shot manages to kill the frigate without
drawing any return fire. A couple of Petyas come to investigate during
the next hour, and they each get torpedoed in turn. However, my attempts
to close in on the heavies are foiled by the patrolling ASW helicopters.
I can hear their dipping sonars, and I know they have MAD, and they’re
so close together that any attempt to infiltrate further will almost
certainly get me caught. My skippers reluctantly admit they aren’t going
to get in, and they patrol quietly beyond the helicopters’ search area.
(The heavies are stopped at the moment, so they are very quiet, and my
subs don’t have a detection on them yet. As a player I could
theoretically open fire with a BOL shot, since I can see the enemy on
radar, but in reality, my subs wouldn’t have this information.)

I have better luck near the west end of Crete, where the Cumberland (one
of the good British ASW ships) is heading to meet up with the two oilers
which are currently making preparations to get underway in Souda. Sonar
operators report a good contact ahead, and as the Cumberland slows to 2
knots to listen, they assess it as a confirmed SS. I doubt it’s a Kilo,
or I probably wouldn’t have detected it so far away, but I could easily
see one of the lesser subs coming down from the Black Sea – possibly a
Tango or the like. The Cumberland’s helicopter heads out, and shortly
radios back the news of a good hit and breakup sounds, so they hurry
home to paint a sub on their nose. (Postwar records show this was
actually a Foxtrot, not a Tango, but the latter sounds better in the
record books. When in doubt, overclaim!)

**THE MAIN ATTACK ON LATAKIA**

The major strike against the Latakia area starts getting underway long
before dawn. Slow-moving support aircraft start taking off to
preposition themselves, and F-14s head out to screen, while attack
planes from the Ike, Foch, Souda, Egypt, and Incirlik all converge in a
perfectly coordinate precision operation, designed to eliminate land and
sea based targets with surgical efficiency. Hah! What really happens is
a haphazard mess of miscommunication (no, go to those tankers!),
forgotten orders (Sir, didn’t you want the F-18s at Souda to attack
too?), and botched timings that results in a jumbled 300 mile long
string of aircraft trying to sort out their positions and sequences.
Even the navy’s not immune, as I cleverly poise my consolidated Iowa
battlegroup just within attack range, only to realize that I’ve been
looking at the range ring for the four long-range Otomats. The dozens of
Harpoons on board are still 25 nm out of range! It takes a sudden
flank-speed dash to try and get into position in time, while planes
refuelling off the Cypriot coast straggle in to their loiter positions.
Finally, everything’s sort of ready in the growing light of dawn.

My previous attack on Latakia (MF \#2) made use of a large number of
TLAMs, and I don’t have so many this time, but I have far more HARMs
than before, so they will make up the balance. First blood goes to the
Etendards, coming in low with short-ranged Exocets to engage patrol
boats and draw enemy SAM fire. Once the SA-10s start opening up the wave
of HARMs is fired in reply, crippling many of the land-based SAMs, and
then the Harpoons and TLAMs (and my four problem-causing Otomats) arrive
en-masse. Plenty get shot down, but enough make it through to sink the
Russian heavies and destroy one of the runways and the aircraft in open
parking at Latakia.

With the major defences down, and almost no response from the Syrian
air-force, attack planes are able to engage the remains of the lesser
air-defence units, using LGBs and Mavericks from beyond their envelope.
It’s the turn of the squadron of F-5s in Cyprus to arrive in the morning
light, and attack radars, broken SAM sites, and Styx batteries all along
the coast. (Speaking of Styxes, they never fired at me, nor did any of
the enemy ships. My task group kept its radars and jammers off this
time, and always had a good jammer plane orbiting overhead, so I suspect
the enemy never had a good fix on me, even though I was in OTH radar
range.) With little opposition in the north, some of my F-14s focus
southward, and start lobbing Phoenixes at the MiG-25s orbiting on the
far side of the southern SAM belt in the Damascus area. Under their
protection, attackers with SLAMs are able to engage some of the SA-5s
around Homs, damaging their radars even if they don’t destroy the site
entirely. (The SA-5s were a real pest earlier in the afternoon but seem
to have used most of their missiles by now.)

**SECONDARY ATTACKS**

As the main body of Latakia attackers begins straggling home, pausing to
refuel before the long flight back home (over 800 miles to the Ike!),
the Turks launch their attack on the Aleppo area. Recce flights over the
northern Syrian air bases haven’t drawn any response, so the mix of
F-5s, F-104s, and F-4s proceeds in reasonable confidence. The Turks
don’t have any HARMs for this attack, and the Americans at Incirlik used
all of theirs at Latakia, so there won’t be any SAM suppression. The
Turks have to come in low. Fortunately, they’re only facing older SA-3s
and SA-2s, not anything modern, and they rush in with rockets and bombs
of all types, and soon they’ve left the Aleppo SAM defences in ruins.

Not to be outdone, the Jordanians follow up with their own strike. They
don’t want to get deep into dense belt of low-level SAMs near Damascus
itself, but there is one set of three SA-2s and an SA-5 exposed without
low-level cover near Dumayr, and those are a worthwhile target. Like the
Turks, the Jordanians have to attack without the benefit of ARMs, but
their concentrated attack swiftly flattens their objectives, and they
turn to retire. The Syrian fighters here haven’t been hit as severely as
the ones up north, however, and two flights of MiG-25s scramble to
intercept their retreat. Fortunately, two flights of American F-15s have
flown in from Egypt, coming in from the south via Saudi airspace, and
they manage to shoot down the MiGs before they can get into the retiring
attack planes.

**CURRENT SITUATION**

It’s now noon, and the last few planes from the morning strike have
landed and begun to re-arm. Only a modest CAP is up to protect the AEW
and ELINT craft near Incirlik and Akrotiri.

The distant Ike has turned and is steaming towards the western end of
its patrol zone, ready to head for the Atlantic when its patrol time is
finished. The Foch, now grouped with the Bainbridge, continues to close
on Cyprus, ready to support further attacks. My resupply ships in Souda
have left port, and joined up with my command group and the Cumberland
to steam for the canal. The Kearsarge amphibious group has met up with
the few remaining unassigned Brits (their oiler, the Type 42, and the
Andromeda), and they are now turning SE to escort their supply ship to
the canal as well. P-3s are screening these transits, looking for
lurking subs, and the Nimrods are patrolling the canal zone, but so far
nothing has turned up yet.

The LA did find the second Kilo, just east of Cyprus, and sank it. They
now have one FF, two ASW patrol boats, and an SSK to their credit, which
isn’t bad for half a day’s work. It, and the other two subs, continue to
patrol.

Syria's northern air defences are gone now, and their only remaining
SA-5s are down with destroyed radars. This means I should have freedom
to operate at high altitude, provided I stay out of SA-2 range. With
more HARMs reloading for an afternoon strike, I think the writing is on
the wall for the Syrian air defence network.

Progress resumes...

**AFTERNOON ATTACKS**

By mid afternoon, most of my aircraft are ready again, and the reduction
of the Syrian air-defences recommences. Aircraft on the Ike, which is
now sailing west, are not part of this attack, but F-18s and A-7s from
Souda, F-18s and Super Etendards on the Foch, as well as attackers from
Turkey and Egypt are ready to go. (The Jordanians, with their long ready
times, won’t be ready again before the fading light of evening, so they
will not be part of these strikes.)

I have plenty of HARM-carrying attackers, and they have enough missiles
to devote two to every known battery of the SAM net. The aging system of
SA-2s and SA-3s is essentially defenceless against them, and even the
few SA-6s don’t manage to knock down the incoming missiles, and that
leaves the network open to low-level attack by cluster bombs, iron
bombs, and rockets. By late afternoon the known SAM sites have all been
struck, and it’s safe to consider them out-of-service for at least a day
or two.

A few of the lesser Syrian fighters make it into the air, but they don’t
last long in the face of numerous American strikers, each carrying a
pair of AMRAAMs. Aircraft bombing the air-defences near the Syrian
airfields spot a few MiG-23s in outdoor parking at Marj Rhayill , and
large numbers of Su-24s at the T-4 Airbase at Tiyas, but overflights by
RF-4s and other planes find little at the remaining airfields. The
aircraft parked outside can be hit easily enough (and some strikers are
diverted to start doing that), but the problem is that the Syrians have
numerous hardened shelters, and we have no way to know what’s lurking
inside them. There could be surprises almost anywhere. I could start
trying to plink shelters, but I could be hitting empties as easily as
hitting full ones, so that may be a waste of ordnance. Instead, F-15Es
and other aircraft with heavy LGBs, and F-4s with 2,000 lb iron bombs,
begin bombing the runways of the major bases, hoping to throttle any
remaining air activity that way. By the time night falls, all the
military airfields are shut.

**NAVAL TRANSIT OPERATIONS**

There's little left to bomb in Syria at this point, so after putting up
a modest CAP, the remainder of my pilots are given a chance to rest. No
further Syrian air activity is observed.

At sea, my ships continue to advance towards their destinations. P-3s
and Nimrods are working near the Suez Canal, and P-3s and S-3s are
covering the path of the retiring Eisenhower. Despite the presence of
numerous biologicals and false contacts between Sicily and Libya, no
enemy submarines turn up there, and the Eisenhower makes its way to the
rendezvous zone without interference.

My logistical ships also arrive at the Suez uneventfully, to await the
arrival of the Nimitz. A few hours after they arrive ASW operators
report a very faint contact at the northern edge of the Suez sonobuoy
field, but it happens just as the plane is heading home to refuel, and
by the time the next plane can get there the contact has faded out, and
the new plane isn't able to recover it. The mystery contact (a Tango, it
turns out) remains at large when the scenario ends shortly afterwards.
