NATO/US Navy/Naval
Aviation

![C:\\Users\\Bart\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\INetCache\\Content.Word\\CV
Flyby.jpg](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/aviation/image1.jpeg)

**Naval Aviation**

The late 80’s and early 90’s were a difficult time for US Naval
Aviation.  Many of the older types were becoming obsolete or out dated
(A-6, F-14).  The A-12 project had been problematic and Congress
cancelled it in 1990 as had programs to improve both the F-14 (Super
Tomcat 21) and the A-6 (A-6F Intruder II and A-6G). Therefore, the Navy
was approaching the mid 90’s with no new fighter aircraft on the
horizon. Relying instead on moving to single fleet of F/A-18s using the
new AMRAAM air to air missile by 1998/99.

Technology was providing some improvement elsewhere however – the
S-3B, introduced in the mid 80’s was a technological paradigm shift
from the S-3A, and the latest E-2C’s were proving to be exceptional. 
Augmented by the new generation of patrol aircraft, the P-3C; this fleet
of surveillance aircraft were using the rapidly advancing power of
computers to quickly and accurately categorize targets and showed the
way ahead for providing situational awareness to a Task Force commander.

Further, the new generation of Helicopters – the H-60 family was also
developing into a resounding success. This single airframe was able to
replace smaller (SH-2 Seasprite) and larger (SH-3 Sea King) models which
were becoming obsolete or simply incapable of using the latest weapons,
satisfying the operators, maintainers and budget all in one swoop.

**Northern Fury**

Northern Fury finds the USN in the process of rapidly retiring the A-6
fleet, only two carriers still have a strike squadron. Starting in 1996
the plan is to start retiring the F-14s. By 1998 the first Carrier Air
Wings (CVW) of purely F/A-18s is to be fielded, a situation that has
many admirals quite upset and crying for more advanced capability.

The resurgence of the Soviet block caused even more turmoil in naval
aviation. Executive orders from the President and a hawkish Congress
demanded that aircraft carriers be maintained, so an urgent need arose
to maintain sufficient naval aviation to equip 12 CVW. The extra wing
would allow 4 to be maintained at high readiness (2 on each coast), 4 in
a rapidly deployable posture, and 4 in training.  Even this meant that 3
of the 15 carriers called for in the 600 ship navy, would not have air
wings.  To satisfy this requirement, the US Congress agreed to fund a
13th CVW, meaning that only 2 carriers were without a permanent CVW:
CV-59 Forrestal which was acting as the Air Training Carrier, and CV-61
Ranger which was in reserve on the west coast.  The plan for CVN-74 when
it entered service later in 1994 was to resume rotating air wings as the
USN reverted to routine refit program.  As the events of the campaign
unfold however, this does not happen and adjustments need to be made.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/aviation/image2.jpg)
