**USN Command Ships**

The United States Navy is a massive organization with ships and aircraft
plying every corner of the globe. To control this organization from one
or two static locations would be difficult and demanding, plus risk
nuclear obliteration in the event of a doomsday scenario. Therefore, a
Command and Control network was established based on numbered Fleets.

![A close up of a map Description automatically
generated](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/command-ships/image1.JPG)

This is a snapshot view of Fleet Areas of Responsibility (AOR) in the
Northern Fury world, historically these were different by 1994 but this
represents how the world has changed.

In order to command these widely dispersed fleets the USN uses
Headquarters which are ‘Afloat’ in Command Ships. These are much more
capable then a traditional ‘Flag Ship’ and are either purpose built
([LCC](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ship/lcc-19.htm) – Amphibious
Command Ship) or converted from other types (AGF – Miscellaneous Command
Ship). In the days when digital communication was in its infancy,
computing power was archaic [compared to
today](http://www.relativelyinteresting.com/comparing-todays-computers-to-1995s/)
- these ships were the most advanced communications platforms in the
world.

Numbered fleets were routinely commanded by a Vice Admiral (3\*), or
Rear Admiral (Upper half) (2\*). 2<sup>nd</sup> Fleet headquartered in
Norfolk Virginia was double tasked as commanding all NATO forces in the
North Atlantic in times of War – Commander Striking Fleet Atlantic
(**COMSTRIKFLTLANT**) was always commanded by a senior 3\* Admiral.

**2<sup>nd</sup> Fleet**: Commanded from Norfolk Virginia in peacetime
but its ‘Afloat’ HQ is on board USS Mount Whitney
([LCC-20](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USS_Mount_Whitney_\(LCC-20\))).
As **COMSTRIKFLTLANT, the commander was responsible for all NATO forces
in the Atlantic that were released for operations by Commander in Chief
Atlantic (CINCLANT) once they’d been declared by their national
government, or in the case of US forces by US Fleet Forces Command.**

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/command-ships/image2.jpeg)

**3<sup>rd</sup> Fleet**: Permanently located ashore at San Diego
California.

**4<sup>th</sup> Fleet**: Will be established at Tampa Bay Florida
shortly after the war starts and will be responsible for the seas around
South America and everything south of the Tropic of Cancer in the
Atlantic, including the west coast of Africa and from Cape Town South
Africa to Antarctica.

**5<sup>th</sup> Fleet**: This fleet was deactivating after its heroic
World War Two actions but was reactivated to control activity in the
Indian Ocean, Persian Gulf and Red Sea areas in Dec of 1993 (July 1995
historically). With an HQ in Bahrain, sharing the Royal Navy Base at HMS
Jufair in the port of Manama. In order to maintain mobility and
communications the Command Ship USS Coronado
([AGF-11](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ship/agf-11.htm)) has deployed
to be the Flagship of 5<sup>th</sup> Fleet. The Coronado was originally
an Austin Class Amphibious Platform Dock (LPD).

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/command-ships/image3.png)

**6<sup>th</sup> Fleet**: With its HQ in Naples and a major logistic
operation at Rota Spain, is responsible for the Mediterranean and Black
Seas. 6<sup>th</sup> Fleet is double hatted as NATO’s Naval Striking and
Support Forces Southern Europe (STRIKFORSOUTH), and in war will
coordinate the activity of all NATO naval forces in the region. The
‘Afloat’ Command Ship is USS La Salle
([AGF-3](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ship/agf-3.htm)) which has just
competed a major refit and assumed these duties on 1 Jan 94 (10 months
earlier than she did historically).

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/command-ships/image4.jpg)

**7<sup>th</sup> Fleet:** Of all US Navy fleets is the only one with a
forward deployed Aircraft Carrier Battle Group (CVBG) and Marine
Expeditionary Force (MEF) permanently established. 7<sup>th</sup> Fleet
is located in Yokosuka, Japan. With responsibility for the Pacific and
Indian Oceans west of the International Date Line to include South
Korea, Australia, Japan and most of the African Coast, this is the
largest deployed USN force. The Command Ship is USS Blue Ridge
([LCC-19](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USS_Blue_Ridge_\(LCC-19\)))

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/command-ships/image5.jpg)

**Communications**: One of the key aspects to enable Command and Control
(C2) is Communications (C3), and to assist in this regard the USN has
two Squadrons of [E-6A
Mercury](https://fas.org/nuke/guide/usa/c3i/e-6.htm) aircraft. These are
heavily modified Boeing 707’s operated by Fleet Reconnaissance Squadron
3 and 4 (VQ-3 & VQ-4) each with eight aircraft located Tinker Air Force
Base in Oklahoma. These aircraft are part of the TACAMO (Take Charge and
Move Out) program to ensure communications between the National Command
Authority and the fleet Ballistic missile submarines. However, the
communication systems on board these aircraft fulfill a much wider role
and enable global secure communications to the fleet. At least two of
these aircraft are airborne at any time, day or night, 365 days a year.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/command-ships/image6.jpeg)
