**<span class="underline">Northern Fury \#9 – Hold the Line</span>**

**<span class="underline">AAR by fitzpatv, July 2021</span>**

Sorry it’s been a while since my last post, but this scenario is an
absolute transatlantic epic and took several days and a lot of grey
hairs to play. It is a very tough challenge indeed...

Matters have grown worse for NATO. Not only have the Soviets taken
Iceland, but Norway has now surrendered and even Stavanger and Oslo are
marked as enemy-held. The Russians have moved aircraft, radars and SAMs
to Iceland with remarkable speed and turned the island into a fortress,
while their subs are flooding into the Atlantic and, with the Varyag and
ubiquitous Kuznetsov carrier groups, are advancing to cut the NATO SLOC
(Sea Line of Communication) with Europe.

American troops and supplies are en route for France in several convoys
and an enormous stream of airliners, the latter constituting the ALOC
(Air Line of Communication) and also encompassing return flights.
Unfortunately, they are very lightly escorted by a few destroyers and
frigates of limited capability. With American carrier groups only just
starting to arrive in-theatre, the USS Enterprise has to shoulder the
burden of defending the entire region for two days.

The iconic carrier, escorted by three cruisers, two destroyers, two
frigates and trailing a supply ship, has a large complement of aircraft
and plenty of SAMs, as well as Harpoons for surface combat. Powerful
though this force is, its reach is limited in the vast Atlantic and, if
the Enterprise is lost, so is the game…

Elsewhere, you have US and Canadian fighters based at Goose Bay,
Labrador and Gander, Newfoundland, along with tankers, AEW and patrol
planes. More fighters are due to be ferried-up from as far away as
Louisiana, some to be re-based in Thule, Greenland, some at Goose Bay
and others (with AMRAAMs and AGM-84 missiles) to reinforce the
Enterprise air group. The latter risks overloading the carrier, so you
have to consider sending some of your less-capable (Sparrow-armed)
Hornets to Goose Bay to make room.

In the UK, you have RAF Tornadoes, the F-15 Eagle squadron previously
engaged in Norway (with Ace status), plus more tankers, EW, AEW and
patrol planes. The French are now joining the fray, with Breguet
Atlantique turboprop sub-hunters based in Lorient and you have a screen
of three US subs for the Enterprise, another near the convoys and the
British SSN Talent to the NW of Scotland.

A big problem is that the convoys and their close escorts are under AI
control, so you can’t alter their course or give them orders and have a
classic ‘responsibility without authority’ issue.

Numerous aircraft have Reserve settings and can be equipped as desired.
As usual, there are lots of pre-set missions which you can take or
leave. I kept the Ferry missions, the Goose Bay tanker one and those
relating to Gander, otherwise creating my own, some of which needing
tailoring as the game progressed. In general, I prioritised long-ranged
Phoenix missiles for my carrier fighters, kept ships’ radars dark and,
as is my preference, had aircraft on Winchester, with Auto Evade off and
one shot per target. Note that you will need to define Doctrine for your
land-based reinforcement squadrons when they arrive at their
destinations, as well as assigning them weapons instead of Ferry
settings.

Though there’s no penalty for disobeying this, Bart suggests having
morale thresholds for some of your squadrons, typically when they are
reduced to 3-5 aircraft. Thankfully, this only happened once, late in
the game.

Hostilities commenced with the UK-based fighters engaging Russian
Flankers screening the Varyag group as it negotiated the Iceland-Faroes
Gap and the Enterprise CAP duelling with the Kuznetsov’s SW of Iceland.
Things started badly, with a Tomcat and Tornado lost for one Su-33. A
MiG-31 Foxhound then popped-up in mid-Atlantic and shot-down a Shadow EW
plane that I was using for recon. NATO air losses typically cost 4VP,
while Soviet planes score half that, larger aircraft being worth more.

It became apparent that the enemy were using tankers to extend their
fighters’ range and threaten the ALOC, while numerous Fencer and Badger
EW planes were creating an electronic fog to the S of Iceland. The
latter was a real nightmare, making it very hard to see where the enemy
were and leading to several incidents where NATO fighters were surprised
by MiGs. Attempts to hunt down the jammers were utterly frustrating, as
it was impossible to locate them accurately enough to fire. I tried
using different types of aircraft and having my own EW planes in
support, but nothing worked. It was much more difficult than dealing
with Soviet jamming in earlier scenarios.

As fighters began to arrive at Thule and Goose Bay, it became apparent
that the Varyag group was attempting to cut the SLOC, leaving Kuznetsov
to take-on Enterprise. Meanwhile, the two Foxhounds pulled-back before
reaching the SLOC (probably went Shotgun after bagging the Shadow) and,
flying with radars off, were intercepted and destroyed by a Lossiemouth
F-15. The Soviets took revenge by downing an F-15 and a Nimrod patrol
plane W of Ireland, but seemed to be taking ‘operational losses’ due to
fuel mismanagement, a theme which continued throughout the game.

A Victor II SSN then appeared near the most Easterly convoy and was
bounced and sunk by an Orion for 25VP. Aerial duels continued to go the
way of the Soviets and I decided that giving battle anywhere near
Iceland was a bad idea, going on the defensive. I had, at least done
some attrition to the Varyag’s fighter group with my British-based
planes, making Enterprise’s task easier. This decision anticipated a
directive along these lines from High Command, which arrived soon
afterwards.

Down South, the frigate USS Patterson was suddenly torpedoed and sunk by
a sub, costing 50VP. More positively, a Hornet with AMRAAMs, one of a
handful so-equipped on the Enterprise at the outset, headed-off and
terminated another incursion by a pair of MiG-31s.

Disaster then struck when a Soviet sub attacked a convoy of five
transports, sinking the lot for a total loss of 250VP. The submarine USS
Sturgeon, nearby, was moving at Creep speed, but totally failed to
detect the culprit. Given the deadly Stallion and Starfish ASW torpedoes
carried by most Russian SSNs, she wasn’t too inclined to go hunting.

An Oscar II SSGN then approached the fleet, opting for a torpedo attack
rather than launching her Shipwreck missiles from a distance. This
proved a poor choice and she was sunk by a Viking patrol plane. Not long
afterwards, a swarm of Su-24 Fencer attack planes barrelled-in at the
Enterprise group from the NE. CAP intercepted them well outside their
missile range and splashed 15 without loss, giving us a major morale
boost.

Kuznetsov’s Flankers then began to make their presence felt N of the
fleet. I engaged them with Tomcats and Hornets armed with 120nm ranged
Phoenixes, which proved highly-effective, rapidly wearing-down the
opposition.

Matters continued to heat-up, with a Sierra SSN making a run at the
fleet and getting sunk by a Seahawk. Kuznetsov and friends (a Kirov,
Slava and a pair each of Udaloys and Sovremennys) then began hurling the
heavier ships’ Shipwrecks and Sandboxes at the task force. This attack
was mostly thwarted by a combination of CAP and RIM-67s, but a couple of
missiles got through and sank the frigate USS Simpson for a loss of
25VP. Another submarine arrived (a Victor III this time), to be
destroyed by an Oceanhawk chopper.

Given a lull, I experimented by launching a TALD decoy flock at the
Kuznetsov group in an attempt to make them waste SAMs (Bearing Only
Launch menu option required). Unfortunately, this didn’t work, mainly
because the Russians had their radars off.

Air skirmishes continued. With the Varyag group now further from Iceland
and somewhat to the E of Enterprise, I resumed harrassing them with
Lossiemouth’s planes, chipping away at the Su-33s at some cost to
myself. More Foxhounds penetrated towards the ALOC and, though none
survived CAP, one got far enough to shoot down an airliner, which cost
20VP. To combat this, I had to use Canadian-based fighters with tanker
support and such aircraft as Enterprise could spare.

Matters came to a head in this respect when a dozen or so MiG-29s made
an all-out attack on the ALOC. Their ‘radars-dark’ approach put them at
a disadvantage and ten were destroyed at a cost of two Canadian Hornets.
The survivors went Shotgun and withdrew.

By now, a dozen AMRAAM-equipped Hornets from the US were beginning to
arrive at Enterprise, after a nervy tanker operation to shepherd them
across the Atlantic (with everything else going-on). These needed time
to rest and prepare, but usefully augmented my air group. I’d lost some
of the weaker Hornets already onboard and flown others off to Goose Bay,
again with tanker support. Hopefully, I’d be able to avoid undue
congestion with what I now had available.

I now mounted a strike against the Kuznetsov force with my dozen
Intruder attack planes (Harpoons), a couple of similarly-equipped
Hornets, a pair of Prowlers with HARMs and some TALDs. The latter again
failed to attract any attention, but the main strike took some advantage
of the initial lack of Soviet radar to surprise and sink an Udaloy II
(25VP) and cripple an Udaloy I, leaving her dead in the water. Both
Harpoon Hornets strayed into SAM range and were lost. The Russians
retaliated with medium-ranged Sunburn missiles, but these were fired
out-of-range and fell short.

With the worst possible timing, three more MiG-29s chose this moment to
go at the ALOC. I intercepted and shot them down, but at a cost of two
fighters. A pair of Fencers made a desperate run at the fleet and were
swatted like flies. Meanwhile, the Kuznetsov’s air group was whittled
away by CAP and Flankers became an endangered species in the vicinity.
With the crippled Udaloy bringing their progress to a dead stop, the
Kuznetsov group had literally been fought to a standstill and I could
now largely ignore them beyond using my Sparrow-armed Hornets to chip
away at their recon and ASW Helixes, eventually exterminating these in
turn.

Enterprise now turned her main attention to the Varyag group, which was
approaching from the E at 18 knots. Identical to the Kuznetsov group, it
consisted of a carrier, two cruisers and four destroyers. I sent
fighters from the carrier and Lossiemouth to wear down the Flankers and,
given a high proportion of planes with AMRAAMs or Phoenixes, could
either use range or the hit-and-run tactics perfected in Norway. The
aerial exchanges shifted heavily in NATO’s favour and the Su-33s were
eventually wiped-out at little or no further cost, the Russian choppers
then following.

Elsewhere, two Soviet SSNs appeared near the Easternmost convoy. The
AI-controlled chopper from the frigate USS Doyle probably hit a Victor
III without sinking her, as she dropped to a dead stop before vanishing,
not to be seen again. A Victor II made a damaging torpedo attack,
sinking one transport and hitting several more. Doyle’s chopper was the
only ASW asset nearby and she only had one torpedo. Some French Breguets
were on their way, but took some time to arrive. When they did, they
caught and sank the offending submarine.

The Varyag squadron drew into range and unleashed its very own Northern
Fury in the form of a hail of Shipwrecks and Sandboxes. Things were
hectic for a few minutes, but CAP’s AMRAAMs and Phoenixes prevented all
but a handful of the enemy ship-killers from getting near and those that
did were snuffed-out by SAMs.

Enterprise struck back with her Intruders and Prowlers, sinking an
Udaloy II and badly damaging another, while also hitting the Kirov. The
enemy speed dropped to nine knots, allowing us the option of disengaging
at will. As before, a Sovremenny fired a few Sunburns from outside their
effective range and these fell into the sea.

By now, a squadron of twelve Hornets with AGM-84 missiles were arriving
to bolster Enterprise’s strike capability, courtesy of another elaborate
tanker-supported operation.

Off to the S, an Orion finally found the Victor III that had sunk the
five transports earlier and took belated revenge. By now, I was doing
what I should have implemented from the start and assigning patrol
planes to missions to guard each remaining convoy, with mission areas
moving relative to the latter’s’ positions.

W of the Kuznetsov group, the SSN Portsmouth had been having a quiet
time observing the enemy from a safe distance. Life then got much more
interesting for her crew\!. First, she detected a submarine to the SE,
too close for comfort. Thankfully, the Russian (the Victor III Tambov)
was asleep and Portsmouth slipped into her baffles to sink her with an
ADCAP Mk48 torpedo. At this point, a formation of Russian aircraft was
detected approaching at 260 knots – a half-dozen Mail ASW flying
boats\!.

Portsmouth dived as deep as possible, went to Creep and prayed that CAP
would get there in time. A fighter intercepted the enemy and destroyed
all but two of them, downing one with her 20mm cannon, but then had to
break off. The survivors droned around over Portsmouth’s position, but
mercifully failed to find her and a second Tomcat intervened with
Phoenixes and cleared them away, earning the submariners’ heartfelt
thanks.

I’d intended Portsmouth and the nearby San Juan to attack the Kuznetsov
with Harpoons, but a bug made it impossible to switch from torpedoes. As
Portsmouth had fired a torpedo, the software relented and let her obey
the Reload Priority order, but her strike failed to penetrate the enemy
SAM shield. Peace and quiet returned for the sub’s crew.

Just as I was beginning to get complacent, a second big Fencer strike
was mounted from Iceland, co-ordinated with a volley of Sunburns from
the Kuznetsov group. As before, the Russian missiles were loosed beyond
their effective range and fell short. CAP then scrambled in force and
massacred the Fencers, including a trailing group of three behind the
main wave.

All this time, the Russians had been making execrably bad use of their
numerous Backfire bombers. With their Kitchen missiles, these could have
been a deadly threat to the fleet, but the Soviet approach seemed to be
to use them singly against the SLOC instead. This might have been
worthwhile had they been able to find it\!. Instead, they droned into
mid-Atlantic or a position E of Greenland, flew in circles, then
withdrew, often to crash-land on the way home to Siberia. After a while,
I worked-out their flightpaths and set-up ambushes which scored a steady
flow of VP, with about 40 of the bombers destroyed in one way or
another. An occasional hazard was attracting the attention of the MiGs S
of Iceland. On one occasion, I lost an F-15 that was refuelling from a
Viking tanker in this area. The Fulcrums pursued the tanker, which
miraculously survived several missiles before getting into the shelter
of CAP, which blasted the bandits with Phoenixes.

With my aircraft re-readied, I launched another Intruder/Prowler attack
on the Varyag group. As the planes were lifting-off, an Oscar I SSGN
appeared, dangerously close to the destroyer O’Bannon\!. A Seahawk
launched in a hurry and removed the threat before it got into torpedo
range, but it was a close call. The strike managed to sink a Slava
cruiser for 75VP, taking me into Triumph territory with a score of +506.
A nuisance to watch-out for is that both Harpoons and AGM-84s need to be
launched from 35,000’ or less, so you have to remember to dive slightly
before attacking.

My AGM-84 Hornets followed-up, but failed to penetrate the
still-impressive Soviet SAM shield. I was having a few problems with ASW
planes on Missions straying into enemy SAM range and had to adjust the
Close ASW Mission area to prevent more losses.

Russian submarines kept appearing and USS Thorne’s Seahawk ended the
voyage of another Sierra NE of the fleet.

By this stage, I was operating AAW missions E of Greenland from Thule
and Goose Bay with advanced tanker support and these added to the enemy
Backfire losses. It would have been satisfying had the AI not been so
mindless.

I kept battering away at the Varyag squadron. A third Intruder/Prowler
strike failed to damage them and prompted another bizarre out-of-range
counterstrike from the Kuznetsov group, using Silexes as well as
Sunburns. It caused some alarm, but no hurt.

With no Harpoons left for the Intruders, I re-armed them with Skippers
and Walleyes. The gauntlet passed to the AGM Hornets and these finally
made the breakthrough, sinking the Varyag herself for 150VP and the
Kirov for 125.

At this point, a Lossiemouth Eagle was bounced by MiG-29s and lost while
I wasn’t looking, though it cost the enemy two fighters. This took 293
Squadron down to three aircraft, so I suspended their operations, as
suggested by Bart.

The plan was now to use Intruders and the SSN Chicago to finish-off the
remnants of the Varyag force, while doing what I could against the
Kuznetsov with my remaining AGM-84 strike, Harpoons from the fleet and
the other two subs. Unfortunately, at this point the game crashed and
there was an error on the Save file (done every hour of game-time) which
stopped me restarting. Under the circumstances, I was happy(ish) to take
the Triumph, with the score approaching +1000. There were only six hours
remaining, the Varyag had been sunk, the Kuznetsov bled white and the
Soviet air groups neutered, while Enterprise remained in rude health.
Many enemy subs had been destroyed, which offset the losses inflicted on
the convoys, while the ALOC had been almost totally safeguarded. The
only residual danger was that a sub could somehow slip through and sink
the Enterprise, but this was extremely unlikely.

The Soviet bid to dominate the mid-Atlantic had been thwarted and, with
more US carrier groups arriving on the scene, the tide of war was
beginning to turn.
