**Northern Fury \#45 – A Rock on the Beach**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Mar 2021</u>**

**Situation**

So, we’re doing a follow-up amphibious operation into the area between
Narvik and Bardufoss, where the battered remains of the 69th MRD are
hanging on. The biggest formation is probably the 303rd MRR, down near
Bjerkvik, although there is two thirds of an independent tank battalion
somewhere here too. I’ve got a task force offshore with numerous landing
craft, large and small, and three airbases and three flat-top amphibs,
with numerous helicopters and attack aircraft. Soviet air and sea
interference should be minimal, so land defences are the primary
concern. We’ve got 18 hours to land, link up, and drive the Soviets out
of the area.

**Plan**

Nothing special. The landing sequence is essentially predefined. My main
concerns (other than mines), are air-defences, artillery, and the
possibility of an armoured counterstrike to mess things up. So, we’ll
start with recce and a dedicated SEAD campaign, using the quick
turnaround of my aircraft as often as possible, and then provide cover
to the landing as necessary.

**Playthrough**

The opening moments reveal two SA-10s deep in the interior, but
fortunately they turn out to be badly degraded remnant units. One gets
its radars shot off by a HARM, and the other gets jumped by low-level
Harriers working their way in from behind. Other than that, there’s a
swarm of MANPADS down there, plus a few SA-13s to stiffen the defences.
The little Pioneer drones are hard-hit by the MANPADS, with two shot
down and one damaged in short order. Fortunately, the F-18s with IR
Mavericks seem to be able to spot the enemy from above their ceiling,
which leads to an extensive campaign of high-altitude anti-MANPADS
operations using every Maverick and LGB I can muster.

One by-product of this extensive hunting operation is the detection of a
series of fortifications, some small and some quite large, tucked away
in the valleys inland. My attack helicopters turn out to be superb at
dealing with these, hitting turrets, cupolas, and embrasures with ATGMs,
and I soon use up my entire stockpile of TOWs.

As this is happening, the initial landings are underway. They are
opposed by little more than occasional infantry platoons, so they go
smoothly, and initial artillery and infantry lodgements are soon
underway, followed by the mechanized landings at Tennevoll and Sjovegan.
So far, the only major enemy formation I’ve spotted (other than some
trucks at Brandvoll), is a whole bunch of dismounted infantry in the
Bjerkvik/Oyord area. This is presumably the 303 MRR. There is no sign of
the tank battalion so far.

With beachheads consolidated, the mechanized troops head inland, with
mech inf scouting ahead of tanks. The northern group springs an ambush
as they approach Brandvoll, losing two platoons of LAVs and some Abrams
before they fight their way out of it. After that I get wiser, and start
sending armed HMMWVs well ahead of the mech forces, as an even more
advanced scout force. They find another ambush further up in the Moen
Valley, and this time I am able to defeat it with minimal losses.

As Hummers and mech troops continue to advance, helicopters bring in
more infantry to reinforce and hold captured areas, and to leapfrog
artillery deeper into the interior. They generally don’t go directly
into the objective areas, preferring to land a few miles away and walk.
(Iceland is still a vivid memory.) Mech Inf and arty sweep up the
dismounted 303 MRR (still no tanks), and eventually the objective areas
are occupied.

**Play Observations**

The extensive array of MANPADS is nasty! If it hadn’t been for those few
F-18s with IR Mavericks, this would have been a much tougher fight.
Surprisingly, more advanced thermal imaging capability in F-18 pods and
Harrier noses is less effective than the Maverick seekers for detection
from altitude. Without them, I’d have been trying to tempt the MANPADS
into taking long-ranged shots, dodging the missiles, and spotting the
launch site. (To be clear, I did do that too, and you can often pull it
off with a high-speed F-18, but the Mavericks did the bulk of the
spotting.) Rolling back the MANPADS gave me a chance to work at lower
altitudes, and that was how I found most of the fortifications.
