<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image1.png" style="width:2.35417in;height:2.32292in" />

**United States Army**

The United States Army is a large and powerful force; technologically
advanced, generally well trained, and held at a relatively high state of
readiness. The 1980’s was a decade of change for the US Army. Coming out
of the Viet Nam era, the now professional (vice conscript) force adopted
new organizations, new training methods, new equipment, new tactics and
overall a completely new concept of integrating combat power. The US
Army of 1994 had been tested during Operation Desert Shield/Storm in
Iraq and, although there was some improvement to make, proved to a great
extent that the reforms had worked beyond the imagination and
expectations of most.

The US Army in Europe through the latter part of the Cold war was the
focus of the entire army structure. Led by 7<sup>th</sup> Army HQ, two
full Corps (V & VII) were largely stationed in Germany with a third
Corps (III Corps) based in the US but having pre-positioned equipment
holdings in POMCUS (Prepositioning Of Materiel Configured in Unit Sets)
sites. Although problematic due to maintenance, cost, security and
standardization, this system was exercised rigorously in the annual
REFORGER (REturn of FORces to GERmany)
[Exercises](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exercise_Reforger). By 1989
the POMCUS system was set up to rapidly deploy six divisions, support
elements and logistics to Germany, within 10 days, to reinforce the four
divisions permanently stationed there. Historically this system came to
a sudden end following the Gulf War, when VII Corps and over half of the
forces in Germany were repatriated and rapidly deactivated.

In the Northern Fury world the US Army has experienced some difficulty
obtaining consistent and clear government direction since the fall of
the Berlin wall. The massive effort in the Gulf War was supposed to be
the closing act to the Germany based VII Corps which, due to budgetary
pressure, was due to deactivate in the early ‘90s. The increased tension
from a resurgent Soviet Union has interrupted that plan mid stride –
inconvenient for both military and budgetary planners. The end result is
that some repatriation has occurred but some plans were canceled and
others modified. The main points of impact are:

-   7<sup>th</sup> US Army HQ remains in Europe (double hatted as CENTAG
    HQ)

-   The 18 Division structure established by the Reagan administration
    remains, therefore

    -   2<sup>nd</sup> Armored Division is not deactivated (planned
        for 1995)

    -   3<sup>rd</sup> Armored Division is not deactivated (in 1992)

    -   5<sup>th</sup> Infantry Division (Mech) is not deactivated
        (in 1992)

    -   6<sup>th</sup> Infantry Division (Light) is not deactivated
        (originally reduced to one brigade in 94, removed in 98)

    -   7<sup>th</sup> Infantry Division (Light) is not deactivated
        (in 1994)

    -   8<sup>th</sup> Infantry Division (Mech) is not deactivated
        (in 1992)

    -   9<sup>th</sup> Infantry Division (Light) is not deactivated
        (in 1991)

    -   Additionally, all National Guard and Army Reserve ‘Training’
        Divisions remain intact.

-   VII US Corps HQ remains in Europe but with a reduced staff and
    structure:

    -   1<sup>st</sup> Armored Division moved to the US with
        3<sup>rd</sup> Brigade remaining in Germany

    -   3<sup>rd</sup> Infantry Division moved to the US with
        3<sup>rd</sup> Brigade remaining in Germany

    -   77<sup>nd</sup> and 210<sup>th</sup> Artillery Brigades moved to
        the US with a POMCUS site in Germany

    -   7<sup>th</sup> Combat Engineer Brigade is transferred from VII
        Corps to 7<sup>th</sup> Army and remains in Germany

    -   197<sup>th</sup> Infantry Brigade (REFORGER) is transferred to
        7<sup>th</sup> Army as CENTAG reserve

    -   207<sup>th</sup> Military Intelligence Brigade is transferred to
        7<sup>th</sup> Army for general support and remains in Germany

-   The ‘Berlin’ Brigade is due to deactivate in July of 1994.

-   56<sup>th</sup> Artillery Brigade, has exchanged its deactivated
    Pershing missile systems for M270 MLRS armed with MGM-140 ATacMS
    (Army Tactical Missile System) and remains a direct reporting unit
    to 7<sup>th</sup> Army HQ.

-   The POMCUS program was expanded to include six more Brigade size
    sets of equipment; 2 for 1<sup>st</sup> Armored Division, 2 for
    3<sup>rd</sup> Infantry Division, and 2 for the two artillery
    brigades.

-   In order to maintain enhanced security in Kuwait, 187<sup>th</sup>
    Infantry Brigade Army Reserve has been activated. This is a unique
    structure as Battlegroup size elements from the standing army,
    National Guard and Reserve rotate through the Brigade on an 8-month
    tour of duty. While in Kuwait they undergo a rigorous training
    program to enhance their combat capability.

It should be noted that divisions based solely in the continental US
(CONUS) except 82<sup>nd</sup> Airborne and 101<sup>st</sup> Air Assault
Divisions, only had two active brigades. The third brigade was either
National Guard or Army Reserve and these, although equipped the same as
the active units, would take a minimum of 30 days to deploy.

During the turmoil of the post ‘Gulf War’ redeployment, manning in the
Army remained relatively constant. Although there was an initial dip in
strength due to planned downsizing in 91-92, this has largely been made
up by 1993. The strength as of Jan 1994 is slightly smaller than its
recent peak in the late ‘80s but about 200,000 more than historic -
totals for the US Army in Northern Fury are:

-   Army: 755,000

-   Army National Guard: 450,000

-   Army Reserve: 582,000

**Structure**

Within the CONUS there are six army level HQs (1<sup>st</sup> Army to
6<sup>th</sup> Army), these are primarily tasked in a mobilization role
in times of national crisis but can be activated for operations such as
3<sup>rd</sup> Army in the Gulf war. The two active armies,
7<sup>th</sup> Army in Europe and 8<sup>th</sup> Army in Korea are on
full operational status. Within CONUS all active duty units are assigned
to Corps and most have a wartime deployment role. The Corps in CONUS
are:

**I Corps**

This is a small Corps charged with experimentation and development, but
has emergency deployment tasks. It is likely that I Corp would deploy to
US Army Pacific, probably with 7<sup>th</sup> Infantry Division (ID) and
its artillery, aviation and air defence brigades. 9<sup>th</sup> ID is a
very unique formation; it is the testbed light wheeled vehicles and
rapid ground mobility. This division was earmarked to deploy to Northern
Germany or Denmark, however its lightly armored infantry ((HMMWV or
Desert Patrol Vehicles), combined with only having two tanks battalions
(in its National Guard round-out brigade) may have precluded its
employment on that front. Its high speed cross country mobility, on the
other hand made the unit ideal for desert operations, and its relative
lack of heavy equipment made it suitable for complex terrain such as
jungle, densely forested areas or even mountains.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image2.png" style="width:4.76042in;height:1.44028in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image3.jpg" style="width:4.78125in;height:3.28632in" />

**III Corps**

The complete opposite of I Corps, this corps is a massive organization
which is destined for Europe in its entirety. III Corps, in addition to
its own formations, is a holding organization for 7<sup>th</sup> Army in
Europe and holds most of the heavy mechanized and armored formations
stationed in the US. Divisions tasked with rapidly reinforcing both of
the Europe based Corps through REFORGER, are held under command of III
Corps for training and administration but, their parent Corps maintain
operational command. Operationally, III Corps will deploy to northern
Germany and operate as part of NORTHAG (British Army on the Rhine) while
formations supporting V & VII Corps will be under command of CENTAG
(7<sup>th</sup> US Army).

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image4.png" style="width:7.20869in;height:3.64583in" />

It is worth noting that the POMCUS policy was to move 6, now 8 divisions
to Germany in less than 10 days: 1<sup>st</sup> Cav, 1<sup>st</sup> ID,
1<sup>st</sup> AD, 2<sup>nd</sup> AD, 3<sup>rd</sup> ID, 4<sup>th</sup>
ID, 5<sup>th</sup> ID, 194<sup>th</sup> Armd Bde\*, 197<sup>th</sup> Inf
Bde\*, 3 ACR, 212<sup>th</sup> FA Bde plus two more FA Bdes for Northern
Fury. The last division (unless you count the three independent Bdes as
a division) is 9<sup>th</sup> ID from I Corps, which would fly over in
its entirety. The feasibility of all but the 9<sup>th</sup> ID
deployment was well practiced, as discussed earlier, 9<sup>th</sup> ID
was not well suited to the north German plain. (\*From XVIII Airborne
Corps below).

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image5.jpg" style="width:7.91667in;height:3.875in" />

**XVIII Airborne Corps**

Commonly referred to as ‘America's Contingency Corps’ this organization
has seen a lot of recent action and deployed to the Sini peninsula in
1982, Grenada in 1983, Panama in 1989 and the Gulf war in 1991. Similar
to III Corps above, this formation is also charged with holding elements
destined for Europe, but the main elements of the corps are its three
rapid deployment divisions, each one unique. 82<sup>nd</sup> Airborne
Division has a battalion task force on 24 hours notice to move anywhere
on the globe, at all times, and the remainder of a brigade moving within
3 days. The 101<sup>st</sup> Air Assault Division maintains an aviation
brigade with over 320 helicopters; more than most nations operate.
10<sup>th</sup> Mountain Division is capable of moving by air to
anywhere in the world within 10 days. 10<sup>th</sup> Mountain has a
National Guard round-out brigade but both of the other divisions are
fully manned standing army units. 24<sup>th</sup> ID it tasked for a
European deployment and will move, less the 48<sup>th</sup> National
Guard round-out Brigade, by sealift with a delivery time of 14 days,
this is the only formation entirely relying on sea lift. The two
independent brigades will deploy to Europe as discussed above.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image6.png" style="width:7.26714in;height:4.226in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image7.png" style="width:11.33333in;height:7.54167in" />

**US Army Europe**

Commanded by 7<sup>th</sup> Army HQ, also acting as NATO CENTAG, these
two Corps and supporting units have been the focal point of US Army
training and development since the end of the Korean War. After the
post-Gulf War reductions this force is at its lowest point in terms of
manning since 1950, with only two fully manned divisions, six
independent or forward positioned brigades and two armored cavalry
regiments. Given 10 days to mobilize, 7<sup>th</sup> Army or CENTAG
would be a powerful force indeed, with 10 American, 7 German, 3 French
and one Canadian division at its disposal. Ten days is a long time in a
modern conflict however.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image8.png" style="width:7.89583in;height:6.50362in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image9.jpg" style="width:5.52083in;height:8.28125in" />

**US Army Pacific**

US Army Pacific is a diverse and dispersed organization. Commanded by
Commander 8<sup>th</sup> Army with his HQ in South Korea and having
forces in Alaska, Hawaii and Japan, this army relies very heavily on its
allies and the USAF to add armor and firepower to the fight.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image10.png" style="width:6.93506in;height:2.67883in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image11.jpg" style="width:12.5in;height:9.21875in" />

**US Army South**

The 193<sup>rd</sup> Infantry Brigade is the only regular army unit in
this command. The primary purpose of this brigade is security of the
Panama Canal Zone, but it also assists the Panamanian Government and
other US agencies in conducting counter insurgency and counter narcotics
operations.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image12.png" style="width:1.84028in;height:1.52708in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image13.jpg" style="width:10.41667in;height:6.42708in" />

**US Army Kuwait**

In the three years following the Gulf War, tensions in the region have
increased, primarily because Iran has become increasingly hostile
towards the West and Iraq. In all likelihood this resurgent hostility is
linked to improved Iranian relations with the Soviet Union. Therefore,
in order to maintain enhanced security in Kuwait, the 187<sup>th</sup>
Infantry Brigade, US Army Reserve has been activated. The brigade is a
shining example of the ‘Total Force’ concept within the US Army; the HQ,
an infantry battalion, 5-5<sup>th</sup> Artillery Battalion HQ and one
battery, Engineer Company and Cavalry Troop are from the Army Reserve,
while the regular army and the National Guard provide a battalion and an
artillery battery each to the force. Each of the three battalions
rotates in for an 8-month tour of duty and mans in-place equipment,
conducts an intensive training program and then returns home. The
battalions rotate at 4 month intervals and routinely train with Kuwaiti
and Saudi forces.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image14.png" style="width:1.96667in;height:1.38681in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image15.jpg" style="width:8.75in;height:4.91667in" />

**US Army Special Operations Command**

The US Army Special Operations Command (USA SOC) is a relatively new
organization, formed in 1989 when all Special Forces were place under
the control of the United States Special Operations Command (SOCOM).
This force, trains, equips, maintains and deploys Special Forces
elements worldwide in response to national priorities. Combined with US
Navy and US Air Force Special Operations elements operating under the
control of SOCOM, it can precipitate strategic effect with a
comparatively minor force commitment.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image16.png" style="width:7.29942in;height:1.83117in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image17.jpeg" style="width:7in;height:5in" />

**US Army Reserve**

The Army Reserve is a force of 582,000 personnel, 1/3<sup>rd</sup> of
the total strength of the army. Although the vast majority are ‘part
time’ soldiers, they are well trained and equipped, subject to immediate
recall and many have regular army experience. Part of the reserve
structure are the 10 ‘Training Division’ HQs, their primary function is
to be a focus for mobilization, training and equipping mobilized troops,
and perhaps commanding those troops as a follow on formation or
providing replacements for battle losses. Another factor to consider
when examining the diagram below, logistics units are not included and a
large portion of the Army Reserve form logistics organisations.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image18.png" style="width:7.36076in;height:3.42857in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image19.jpg" style="width:7.5in;height:4.98958in" />

**The US Army National Guard**

The National Guard (NG) represents 25% of the deployable army and is a
fundamental element in the ability of the US Army to succeed in battle.
Over 60,000 National Guardsmen deployed to the Gulf War including two
formed artillery brigades. The Gulf War also pointed out some
shortcomings in NG readiness and a program has been put in place to
rectify these. Some units are equipped with the latest generation of
equipment while most use slightly older kit, but even that is the same
or better than some NATO allies. Four of the NG division HQs, as well as
the IX Corps HQ, at least one artillery brigade and probably several
other elements have a follow on reinforcement role to NATO. Readiness
levels have improved since the Gulf War as have training programs. Most
units should be ready to deploy within 30-45 days of mobilization while
some will take up to 60 days of training with some re-equipping. It is
likely that more than 50,000 NG troops will deploy individually or in
small units within the first 14 days of mobilization including up to
five artillery brigades, two engineer brigades and one or two aviation
brigades.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image20.png" style="width:9in;height:6.64894in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image21.jpg" style="width:8.22222in;height:6.25in" />

**<u>Equipment</u>**

**Main Battle Tank (MBT)**

[**M1**](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m1.htm): The extremely
successful M1 Abrams MBT began production in 1979 and continued through
1985 when the last of 3,273 were produced for the US Army. A 61 ton
reliable, well proven tank with a 105mm rifled gun, it can travel at 45
MPH (72 KPH) and has a range of 310 miles (500 Km). In comparison to
others this is an excellent, tank, it has the same gun as the Leopard 1,
but is 50% heavier and also has a shorter operational range. The main
concern with this MBT is high fuel usage requiring additional logistic
support. After sales to Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, upgrades to later
variants and general attrition are factored in; there are 1630 basic M1s
available to the US Army in 1994.

**M1IP**: This version has improved engine performance, efficiency, and
better turret armor but in most other ways is the same as the M1. There
were 894 produced.

**M1A1**: This tank, in addition to other improvements, replaced the gun
with the 120mm Smooth bore cannon, the same gun used by the Leopard 2.
In comparison the M1A1 is heavier but achieves the same speed (42 MPH/68
KPH) over a longer distance 288 miles (463 Km) versus the Leopard 2
which achieves a range of 211 miles (340 Km). By 1992 there were 4,976
M1A1s produced.

**M1A2**: Upgraded M1s to a similar configuration as the M1A1 in
particular upgrading the gun, these also had a second thermal site for
the commander allowing rapid engagement subsequent targets at night or
in obscured conditions. Total available in early 1994 is 1,190 including
190 new production and about 1000 upgraded versions.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image22.jpg" style="width:4.45833in;height:2.97166in" />

[**M60A3**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/US/M60_Patton.php):
Built in the 1980s, the latest version of the ‘Patton’ MBT carried the
same British made L7, 105mm riffled gun as the M1 Abrams, with a fire
control system that produced a 70% hit probability of another tank at
2000 meters. By the time production stopped over 1700 had been built and
another 1700 older models had been converted to this standard.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image23.jpeg" style="width:4.43333in;height:2.77083in" />

**Disposition of MBTs**

As the M1A2 Abrams continues production, an ongoing program is cascading
newer MBTs across the entire army. Formations assigned to REFORGER have
a higher requirement as they need to provide a fill set of equipment to
the POMCUS site, while maintaining a partial set for training in CONUS.
Formation assigned to 7<sup>th</sup> Army Europe, both permanently
stationed and REFORGER units require approximately 5,300 MBTs, including
1,800 tanks based in CONUS for training will cascade to NG units upon
mobilization. Other active army users such as I Corps, 24<sup>th</sup>
ID and PACOM require another 500 MBTs. All of these units are also
equipped with the M1A1 or M1A2 Abrams MBTs. Army Reserve elements, NG
independent armored battalions and brigades as well as the armored
battalions in independent infantry brigades and armored cavalry
regiments are equipped with the M1IP. The remaining formations are a mix
of basic M1 MBTs and M60A3s.

-   **M1A1** & **A2**: Total 6,166: 5300 for Europe & REFORGER; 500 for
    PACOM & 24ID, remainder to CONUS forces.

-   **M1IP**: 894: Reserve, NG & CONUS forces.

-   **M1**: 1630: Reserve & NG.

-   **M60A3**: 3400: Mostly NG.

**Armored support vehicles**

All armored support vehicles are based on the M60 chassis. Although some
support vehicles based on the M1 are in development, they are several
years from fielding. These are spread throughout the force:

-   312 x M728 Combat Engineer Vehicle (CEV).

-   400 x M60 Armored Vehicle Launched Bridge (AVLB).

-   1,427 x M88A1 Armored Recovery Vehicles (ARV).

-   896 x M88 upgraded to A1 standard.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image24.jpg" style="width:9.88547in;height:6.68403in" />

[**M2 Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle
(IFV)**](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m2.htm)

The Bradley is the standard infantry vehicle in the mechanized forces of
the US Army. It is armed with a 25mm ‘Bushmaster’ chain gun, has a crew
of three and carries six soldiers able to dismount to clear the enemy.
By 1994 initial production was complete and upgrading older versions to
meet the latest standard was underway, this is several months faster
then happened historically. In total 4,641 M2s were built with over half
being built to the A2 ‘high survivability’ standard. All but the first
1,600 A0 variants also carried a TOW 2 missile launch system. M2
disposition is roughly equivalent to the M1A2 laydown, with Germany
based units and POMCUS sites having the latest A2 variants and CONUS
based units, Reserve or NG having the A1 and A0 versions.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image25.jpeg" style="width:5.19792in;height:3.37865in" />

[**M3 Bradly Cavalry Fighting Vehicle
(CFV)**](http://www.military-today.com/apc/m3_bradley.htm)

Almost identical to the M2 in appearance, the M3 only carries two
dismounts, with the remainder of the space used for extra radios,
storage and ammunition for the TOW missile systems. In all, 2,083 CFVs
were built and issued to all armored cavalry units, including NG units.
These had the same variant details as the M2 and once again, Germany has
the latest equipment while the older variants requiring refit are in
CONUS.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image26.jpg" style="width:5.21875in;height:3.69529in" />

[**M113 Armored Personnel Carrier (APC)
Family**](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m113.htm)

This versatile and reliable family of vehicles has been in use for over
30 years in the US Army and has found its way into over 50 other armies
around the world. Some 34,000, primarily the standard ‘Battlefield Taxi’
variant were produced for the US, while over 80,000 were produced
worldwide. These vehicles are used in virtually every mechanized unit in
the army and are often pushed into roles they were not designed for. In
1994 the following are in the inventory:

-   Approximately 16,000 x A1, A2 or A3 variant; standard troop carrier.

-   1,600 x M113A4 Armored Medical Evacuation Vehicle (AMEV). Ambulance
    when translated to English.

-   1950 x M106 mortar carriers with 107mm (4.2in) mortars.

-   1275 x M125 mortar carriers with 81mm mortars.

-   4000+ x M548 ammunition carrier.

-   5000+ x M577 command post vehicle.

-   3300 x M901 Self Propelled (SP) TOW-2 missile launchers.

-   1000+ x M981 Fire Support Team Vehicle (FIST V)

-   600 x M730A2 Guided Missile Equipment Carrier (Chaparral)

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image27.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" />

**Artillery**

The US Army has vast quantities of artillery systems to outfit the 48
artillery brigades across the force. Each division has a DivArty Brigade
generally consisting of a 155mm battalion with 18 guns working as Close
Support to each maneuver brigade, plus a battery of MLRS (M270 Multiple
Launch Rocket System) and a target acquisition battery in General
Support. 82<sup>nd</sup> and 101<sup>st</sup> divisions have 105mm Close
Support battalions and a 155mm General Support Battalion using M198
towed howitzers. The 30 independent brigades have a wide range of
configurations and are meant to provide the Corps and Army commanders
flexibility by supporting the main effort divisions with extra fire
power. Key artillery systems are:

-   1100+ x [M101](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m101a1.htm) &
    [M102](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m102.htm) towed 105mm
    howitzers.

-   150 x [M119](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m119.htm) (Light
    Gun) towed, air portable 105mm howitzers.

-   2,400+ x
    [M109A2](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m109.htm)/A3/A4 SP
    155mm howitzers.

-   &lt;100 x M109A6
    [Paladin](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m109a6.htm) SP
    Autonomous howitzers (24<sup>th</sup> ID).

-   1000+ x [M198](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m198.htm) towed
    155mm howitzers.

-   526 x [M114](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m114.htm) towed
    155mm howitzers.

-   1046 x [M110A2](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m110a2.htm) SP
    203mm howitzers.

-   750+ x M270 SP [MLRS](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m270.htm)
    (replacing all Lance and Pershing systems)

-   35- x MGM-52 [Lance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MGM-52_Lance)
    SSMs, conventional warheads only, retiring.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image28.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.25in" />

**Air Defence systems**

The 10 Air Defence Artillery (ADA) brigades across the army are
allocated roughly one per Corps with additional brigades under army
control. There are some independent units supporting fixed
installations. Each brigade is unique and task tailored for the rolls
and responsibilities it has been given. Generally, US Army ADA is
focused on the High Level and the Very Low Level air defence threats,
leaving medium level threats to other nations or NATO air forces to deal
with. The systems in inventory are:

-   220 x [M167](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M167_VADS) towed 20mm
    Vulcan.

-   360 x [M163](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M163_VADS) SP 20mm
    Vulcan.

-   1060 x [Stinger](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/stinger.htm)
    missile launchers (13,000 missiles).

-   500+ x [Avenger](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/avenger.htm)
    HUMMWV mounted Stinger missile launcher.

-   600 x [Chaparral](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m730.htm) SP.

-   500+ x [MIM-104
    Patriot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIM-104_Patriot) SP High
    level missile system

-   400+ x
    [I-Hawk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIM-23_Hawk#I-Hawk:_MIM-23B)
    towed High level missile system

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\army\image29.jpeg" style="width:4.13119in;height:2.43325in" />
