<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image1.png" style="width:1.57222in;height:2.29167in" />

**2<sup>nd</sup> Marine Division**

**GCE**: The 2<sup>nd</sup> Marine Division forms the Ground Combat
Element for II MEF’s operation to retake Iceland. The 2<sup>nd</sup>
Marine Regiment is not involved directly in this operation, they have
one Battalion (2/8 Marines) in the Mediterranean as 22<sup>nd</sup> MEU
who will remain there until re-tasked, and one Battalion (1/8 Marines)
acting as the II MEF reserve pre-positioned in Gander Newfoundland,
while the remaining Battalion (3/8 Marines) secures the three airbases
in Greenland.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image2.jpg" style="width:4.69792in;height:4.07153in" />

Commander 2<sup>nd</sup> Marine Division has grouped his forces into two
powerful Regimental Landing Teams (RLT); reinforcement by 4<sup>th</sup>
Marine Davison has allowed him to attach a Tank Battalion to each RLT
while keeping 2<sup>nd</sup> Light Armored Infantry Battalion as his
reserve. Amphibious support, Reconnaissance, Combat Engineers and Combat
Service Support elements will support both RLTs but remain under
Divisional control. For Artillery support, two M198 Batteries of
1/10<sup>th</sup> (a Bty is with the MEU in the Med) and the entire
5/10<sup>th</sup> (24 x M109) will be in General Support (GS) to the
Division with the main task of Counter Battery.

**Artillery**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image3.jpg" style="width:6.25in;height:4.16667in" />

10<sup>th</sup> Marine Regiment has four Battalions of artillery. Three
of the Battalions are designated as ‘Close Support’ to the three Marine
Infantry Regiments and equipped with 24 M198 towed 155mm howitzers each;
2/10<sup>th</sup> and 3/10<sup>th</sup> Marines will land with their
affiliated RCTs however, 1<sup>st</sup> Battalion will deploy to Iceland
with two Batteries in the GS role (‘C’ and ‘I’ Batteries), ‘B’ Battery
is in the Med with 22<sup>nd</sup> MEU and ‘A’ Battery is in Greenland
waiting for transport if it is needed or possibly to deploy with the MEF
reserve. The fourth Battalion (5/10<sup>th</sup> Marines) is equipped
with 24 M109 Self Propelled Howitzers and will land as GS, these were
historically retired in 90/91 but retained in Northern Fury, they are
the A-3 variant and not the semi-autonomous A-6 Paladin used by the US
Army.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image4.jpg" style="width:6.21875in;height:4.14178in" />

**Light Armored Vehicle (LAV-25)**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image5.jpg" style="width:6.63542in;height:4.98294in" />

A new and evolving organization in the Division is the Light Armored
Infantry Battalion with around 100 LAV-25 variants. 56 of them are the
standard infantry carrier with the 25mm Gun.

2<sup>nd</sup> Light Armored Infantry (LAI) Battalion started life in
1984 as the 2<sup>nd</sup> Light Armored Vehicle (LAV) Battalion before
adopting its current name in 1988. It is due to change again to the
Light Armored Reconnaissance (LAR) Battalion later in 1994. The unit has
4 infantry companies with 56 Infantry LAVs, a TOW platoon with 16
LAV-TOW, 8 LAV-Mortar, 8 LAV Command posts, 6 LAV wreckers and 16
Logistics LAV variants.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image6.png" style="width:5.39583in;height:3.02167in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image7.jpg" style="width:3.9375in;height:3.37969in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image8.jpeg" style="width:4.26042in;height:2.4272in" />

**Marine Armor**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image9.jpg" style="width:6.25in;height:4.10417in" />

Both 2<sup>nd</sup> and 4<sup>th</sup> Tank Battalions are equipped with
70 M1A1 tanks and 72 TOW missile systems providing some heavy punch to
the RLTs.

2<sup>nd</sup> Tank Battalion fought in the Gulf War with Viet Nam era
M60 Tanks but exchanged them for the new M1A1s upon returning to the US.
In addition to the 4 tank companies with 17 tanks each, there is an
Anti-Tank company with 72 TOW mounted in HUMVEEs in 3 platoons of 24
each. Combined, this battalion gives significant direct fire capability
to the Division.

4<sup>th</sup> Tank Battalion is part of the USMC reserve. It was the
only USMC unit to deploy to the Gulf War with the M1 and is in need of a
new Motto. The current Motto ’53 Days’ represents the time from
activation to combat in the Korean war. In the Gulf War they were in
action only 32 days after activation. In this war they were activated as
a precaution on the 10<sup>th</sup> of Feb and will see combat on the
27<sup>th</sup>, a mere 17 days.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\us\navy\amphibious\mef\ground-combat-element\media\image10.jpeg" style="width:5.84375in;height:3.28711in" />
