**Expeditionary Support Group (ESG) Peleliu**

ESG Peleliu has been on patrol in the Indian Ocean with the primary task
of watching the situation in Somalia unfold for the past five months. At
war start she is returning from a port visit to Diego Garcia and while
returning to the coast of Africa she is enabling the rotation of her two
detached LSTs. These LSTs are tasked with maintaining a presence off
Mogadishu in case a Non Combatant Evacuation (NEO) is required or if
directed, troops need to be inserted back into the City. *FFG-51 USS
Gary* is not part of the ESG but is part of the international force:
CTF-150 providing maritime security along the coast of Somalia and the
Gulf of Aden. The Gary will be attached to Under Command the ESG at war
start.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/peleliu/image1.jpg)

ESG Peleliu

  - LHA 5 USS Peleliu
    
      - Elem VMA-311 – 6x AV-8B Harrier II+
    
      - Elem HMLA-267 – 4x AH-1W and 4x UH-1N
    
      - HMM-166 – 12x CH-46E
    
      - Elem HMH-463 – 4x CH-53D

  - CG 34 USS Biddle

  - DD 992 USS Fletcher
    
      - Elem HSL-43 – 2x SH-60B

  - LPD 7 USS Cleveland

  - LSD 39 USS Mount Vernon

  - LST 1186 USS Cayuga (Detached)

  - LST 1195 USS Barbour County (Detached)

  - 13<sup>th</sup> MEU (Special Operations Capable)

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/peleliu/image2.jpg)

*LHA 5 USS Peleliu*, in this photo it is accompanied by *LPD 5 USS
Ogden* and *LSD 42 USS Germantown*

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/peleliu/image3.jpeg)

*CG 34 USS Biddle*, a Belknap class cruiser, the last conventionally
powered cruiser constructed before the Ticonderoga class. She has
undergone a New Threat Upgrade (NTU) making her a moderately capable Air
Defence ship with modern radars and 50 ‘Standard’ SM-2 missiles fired
from a twin rail launcher.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/peleliu/image4.jpg)

*DD 992 USS Fletcher* is a fully modernized Spruance class destroyer.
She is one of the best ASW ships available and has a vertical launch
system with 45 Tomahawk Land Attack Cruise Missiles (T-LAM). Her air
defences are relatively weak but her embarked helicopters provide
significant flexibility.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/peleliu/image5.jpeg)

*FFG 51 USS Gary* is a ‘Long Hull’ Oliver Hazard Perry (OHP) class
frigate with SH-60 helicopters. She is a very capable well rounded ship.
