**Northern Fury 11 - Changing of the Guard**

19 February 1994, 0800 Zulu, 0600 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf11\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.40139in" alt="What happens when two carriers kick in your door at once - We Are The Mighty" />

Morning on the sixth day of a new global war between East and West, the
situation is starting to stabilize. The ground war in Europe is still
undecided but NATO forces in CENTAG (Central Army Group) have blunted
the main Soviet advance somewhat, while the air war over Germany has
seen the loss of hundreds of NATO aircraft. Conflicts in the Caribbean,
Mediterranean, Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean have stabilized in NATO’s
favour, both the Panama and Suez Canals remain open and navigable.

The situation in the North Atlantic remains desperate. The rapid capture
of North Norway and Iceland have allowed the Soviets to surge almost 100
submarines into the Atlantic. The USS Enterprise CVBG spent two
difficult days blunting an attempt by the Red Banner Northern Fleet to
interdict the sea lanes, she is now preparing to retire for re-supply
and re-organization, as are the major Soviet surface units.

The USS Eisenhower, after three days of hard fighting in the
Mediterranean, has passed through the Pillars of Hercules and is heading
north. She will join the USS Carl Vinson CVBG to strike at Soviet forces
around Iceland in three days.

Now it is time for the USS Carl Vinson to take center stage and relieve
the embattled USS Enterprise and hold off any Soviet assaults until the
Eisenhower arrives on scene.

This scenario is playable by either WP or NATO:

As the NATO player you must safely withdraw the USS Enterprise CVBG and
replace it with the USS Carl Vinson CVBG in a holding area south of
Iceland.

As the WP player you have multiple submarines and significant air /assets
at your disposal. Your task is to sink one or both US aircraft carriers.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf11\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.3in" alt="Psychiatric mind control Admiral Jeremy “Mike” Boorda Navy programming hit men and assassins – Arlene Tyner | chemtrailsaroundtheworld&amp;#39;s Blog" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#11</u>** is the first opportunity the player has to
operate two US aircraft carriers in the same area. All is not well
however as ammunition stocks and available aircraft on the Enterprise
are depleted, and the Carl Vinson still has a long way to go.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf11\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.25in;height:3.22917in" alt="Grumman F-14 Tomcat | Aircraft |" />
