Soviet Army

The Soviet Army, or more accurately the Soviet ground forces, are a
conscript based army fielding a total strength of about 1.8 million men.
The Soviets divide these forces into Theaters (TVD) and Military
Districts (MD). Changes to the Warsaw Pact (WP) structure have meant
major displacements of troops. However, the hardline Kremlin did not
wish to inundate parts of the Soviet Union with hundreds of thousands of
troops to draw upon their local economies or food supplies. To solve
this dilemma while still maintaining a similar force structure, they
chose to hoist their problem on Czechoslovakia and Hungary, while
dispersing those forces they did bring back to the motherland as widely
as possible.

The forces which were formerly resident in East Germany have moved,
mostly to Czechoslovakia, and to a lesser extent Hungary. The former
structures have remained largely intact except that the Western Group of
Forces (Western TVD) now includes the former Soviet Central Group of
Forces (Central TVD). Forces which were stationed in Poland, the
Northern Group of Forces (Northern TVD) have been dispersed into the
western Soviet Union (Belarus, Ukraine, and the Baltics). Other
organizational changes will be discussed in detail in the relevant
pages.

In Northern Fury, the Red Army fields 191 maneuver divisions, including
134 motorized rifle divisions (MRD), 50 tank divisions (TD), and 7
airborne divisions (Abn Div). Of these maneuver divisions, 13 are
stationed in Czechoslovakia, 8 in Hungary, 82 in the European portion of
the USSR, 29 in the Central Asian portion and Afghanistan, and 52 in
Siberia, the Far East, and Mongolia.

A more complete understanding of the late Cold War Soviet Ground forces
can be obtained by studying these documents:

  - US Army Field Manual: [FM100-2-1 - THE SOVIET ARMY: Operations and
    Tactics](https://fas.org/irp/doddir/army/fm100-2-1.pdf)

  - 
  - [FM100-2-2 - THE SOVIET ARMY: Specialized Warfare and Rear Area
    Support](https://fas.org/irp/doddir/army/fm100-2-2.pdf) [FM100-2-3 -
    The Soviet Army: Troops, Organization, and
    Equipment](http://www.trngcmd.marines.mil/Portals/207/Docs/MCIS/ITEP/RITC-East/FM%20100-2-3.pdf)

  - [Warsaw Pact Order of Battle
    June 1989](http://suptg.thisisnotatrueending.com/graveyard/26912082/images/1377961541351.pdf)

![](/assets/images/warsaw/su/army/image1.jpg)
