**Caribbean Fury 3: Rumble in the Jungle**

17 Feb 1994, 0600 Zulu, 0100 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf3\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.25in" alt="Capturing the Army | National Army Museum" />

The Caribbean, although a sideshow to the global events occurring
elsewhere, is of vital interest to NATO’s largest partner – the US, and
also vitally important to the British, Dutch and French, all holding on
to the last vestiges of their colonial empires. The American government
and military commanders want to quickly stabilize the situation here and
get on with fighting the real war. The British want to prevent a
protracted insurgency in Belize, while the French and Dutch want the
other two to focus on the largest threat to their territory – Venezuela.
The Americans are not interested, they have no interest in protecting
European imperial linkages in their backyard and as far as Venezuela is
concerned, they want to give the newly anointed President Chavez a
chance to renew close ties with the US.

The Soviets simply want their proxies to distract and tie down as many
US forces as possible, for as long as possible. Cuba has essentially
been knocked out of the war already, the raid on Castro’s Hacienda
either killed him or forced him into hiding. The Dictator has not been
seen in 36 hours and a ‘pro-piece’, but not necessarily ‘pro-American’
government has taken power and called for a cease fire. Nicaragua,
Honduras and the rebellions in Panama and Belize are still in play
however and Moscow is keen on having others do their fighting for as
long as possible

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf3\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.32633in;height:4.11458in" alt="PHM-1 Pegasus" />

----------------

**<u>Caribbean Fury \#3</u>** In this third scenario you have two main
tasks: The American focus is to knock Honduras and Nicaragua out of the
war; the British focus, aided by the French, Dutch and others is to
stabilize the situation in Belize and deliver knock-out blows to the
Guatemalan backed insurgents without bringing Guatemala into the war.

It may be wise on a military level for US forces to assist the British,
but that must be balanced with the political imperatives from
Washington. Your resources in this theater are dwindling, distances are
growing as targets are more remote, and the bad guy *always* gets a
vote.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf3\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.325in" alt="a 7 corsair | LTV A-7 Corsair II | Aircraft, Military aircraft, Fighter aircraft" />
