**Serbia** ![](/assets/images/warsaw/rs/image1.png)

![](/assets/images/warsaw/rs/image2.gif)

**Serbia** is the newest member of the Warsaw Pact and has gravitated
into the Soviet sphere as the dissolution of the former Republic of
Yugoslavia (FRY) partitioned the population and geography into an
East-West divide. With Italy and Austria backing Slovenia, and the US
and Germany funding and supporting Croatia, Serbia became isolated and
reached out to the Soviet Union and its neighbors in Bulgaria, Romania
and Hungary for assistance. They complied.

Timing is important. In Feb 1994, Montenegro, Kosovo and Macedonia are
still firmly in Serbian hands. Bosnia is in the midst of a civil war and
Serbia is firmly in the pro re-unification camp; supporting Bosnian
Serbs against the Bosniaks, Croats and indirectly against western
elements trying to resolve the issue. Western influence in the three
Serbian provinces - Montenegro, Kosovo and Macedonia, is being actively
countered with both funds and force.

The Serbian alignment with the Warsaw Pact has significantly tied
western and NATO hands in this region. ***OPERATION DENY FLIGHT*** is
starting to pick up steam and there is an agreement to provide air
support to UNPROFOR (UN Protection Force) but the first air support
mission historically did not happen until 10 April, 94. Also
***OPERATION MARITIME GUARD*** was integrated into EU activities forming
***OPERATION SHARP GUARD*** in June 1993. The maritime task is largely
one of contraband interdiction, primarily smuggling by criminal elements
into and out of Italy. Serbia’s new Warsaw Pact allies are making sure
that Serbia is well equipped, and through them the Bosnian Serbs and
other supporting factions. So the net effect of NATO operations is to
support Serbia by denying its opponents the funds and weapons it needs
to continue the Bosnian war.

At the outbreak of war a very interesting and delicate – from a NATO
perspective – situation will exist in the Bulkans, remembering that
Austria is ‘non-aligned’ and ostensibly neutral. Serbia and Croatia are
also non-aligned and unlikely to commit to war quickly as they have no
meaningful combat force. Bosnia is protected by a No-Fly zone, policed
by ***OPERATION DENY FLIGHT.*** Forces committed to UNPROFOR, and the
two NATO operations cannot engage in combat activities without violating
a UN Security Council resolution, nor can they use bases or airspace in
neutral countries to operate from without violating international law.
This will all get sorted out but it will take hours, if not a couple
days before western governments even get around to acting in this
undeniably secondary front. If Serbia were to declare itself neutral,
even for a few days, it would complicate the situation even further.
