**Royal Navy Aircraft Carriers**

Although the RN had more true aircraft carriers than any other NATO
country beside the United States at the end of the second world war and
through much of the Cold War, the three Invincible Class ships, by any
measurement must be considered light carriers when compared to American
Fleet Carriers. Indeed, they are slightly more than half the
displacement of American Wasp and Tarawa class Amphibious Assault ships,
with a similar air group capacity. However, designed for Sea Control as
opposed to power projection, these ships were very capable and often
acted as flagships for NATO task groups.

[**Invincible
Class**](http://www.military-today.com/navy/invincible_class.htm)

The three carriers in this class were commissioned in the early 80â€™s and
are quite modern and capable ships with Sea Dart missiles and Phalanx
Close in Weapons Systems (CIWS). They generally carry a mixed air group
of 10-12 Sea Harriers and 8-10 Sea King helicopters but this air group
is often changed, increased or decreased based on the threat and task at
hand. RAF Harriers are often carried whenever amphibious or land based
operations are supported. With the three ships in the fleet, the RN
counted on having two at sea nearly continuously while the third
undergoes refit. At the start of Northern Fury, HMS Illustrious is
returning to the UK to commence refit while Invincible is at sea in home
waters working up its crew after her own overhaul. Ark Royal is
departing South Africa for a tour up the east coast of Africa to rejoin
the Anti-Piracy task force in the Gulf of Aden.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\navy\carriers\image1.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.65972in" />

| Pennant | Name        | Location           | Remarks         |
|---------|-------------|--------------------|-----------------|
| R05     | Invincible  | South of Ireland   | Training        |
| R06     | Illustrious | Eastern Med        | Returning to UK |
| R07     | Ark Royal   | South Indian Ocean | Tour of IO      |
