**<span class="underline">Pacific Fury \#3 – Caught Flat Footed</span>**

**<span class="underline">Playtest Report by Badlandz May 2021</span>**

I gave this one a try over the past few days. I cheated a bit and
definitely got lucky. More on that later.

As I am sure most people do, I started by reviewing the /assets
available. I immediately noted the COIN aircraft. Uh oh, Belize all over
again\!

I also noticed the range circles on some of the ships in Subic bay. (
this is where I feel that I cheated) However, the go fast boat is what
go my attention. I immediately sent the Philippine patrol boat back to
the bay at maximum speed. Realizing that there was no hope of actually
catching up to the speed boat, I launched 2 OV-10s in pursuit. ( One of
my lucky moments). As luck would have it they were low over the bay when
hostilities kicked off. I was surprised by the effectiveness of the
patrol boat’s gunnery. It took down the 3 hostile ships fast enough that
only one OV-10 made an attack. Expending 1/2 it’s rockets for little
obvious impact. The OV-10 rockets were effective against the mortar crew
though.

When hostilities started I decided to keep the replenishment group near
the bay. I wanted the Kinkaid to act as an ASW screen for a short while.
( Another lucky point). Since my luck was holding, she was the initial
air defense of the bay area. Her missiles stopped most of the first wave
of cruise missiles. One got through. That’s where I discovered that the
air defenses in place were unable to engage missiles. Was that
intentional? I’m assuming that this is a database issue. I can’t believe
that a Vulcan cannon couldn’t shoot at something the size of a small
plane. My luck held\! No explosion from the impact.

With the missile attacks in progress, I launched the F-5As and F-5Es in
pairs. They turned out to be effective in intercepting the missiles.
Kinkaids radar spotted them and the F-5’s got close enough for a lock
on. While I never hunted the sub that launched the missiles, it’s
attacks weren’t effective either.

Out at sea with the Carrier. At the scenario start I launched the E-2 to
patrol north of the battle group. Soon after arriving on station there
was a radar contact NW of a surfaced submarine. This contact turned out
to be the Juliet mentioned in the brief. Wikipedia says she has to
launch her missiles while surfaced. A surfaced nuclear capable sub near
the CVBG? Not a good sign. An S-3 was sent up there. I believe it was
the S-3 that reported the fist missiles inbound to the group. I also
sent the USS San Francisco to intercept the Juliet just in case the S-3
wasn’t able to localize it. When the S-3 arrived the Juliet was on the
surface. It didn’t dive away. The San Francisco fired a harpoon to sink
it.

I had the Tidsdale recover her RHIBs and turn north at full speed. She
and the Vincennes were added to the CVBG. Long term plan was to exchange
the Kinkaid for the the Tidesdale in the URG.

The final bit of luck came from the same little S-3. After watching the
harpoon hit the Juliet, it flew east towards the area where missiles
were detected. At that point I wasn’t sure if I was dealing with an
Oscar or just an offset missile route. Either way, another great piece
of luck. The S-3 found an Oscar...with MAD. What’s the chance of that
happening? Mr Oscar took 2 torpedoes before taking a final dive.

The CVBG launched an air strike with tanker and B-52 support from
Andersen. One Sovremenny destroyer and the Minsk were eliminated. No
other damage. The post scenario review showed the SA-6 missiles were not
exhausted by the attacks. The Frunze had 47 remaining and the Slava
having 15. With a bit more time the enemy SAG would have been chased
down and eliminated. In retrospect, I think the on scene commander
should have chased the Soviet group and met up with the replenishment
group later. The method I used left both jobs undone. I guess my next
job will be the commander of Thule latrine detail.

Losses to the CAG were 2 F-14, 3 F/A-18D and 1 S-3. All due to the
bombardment. Total losses includes 3 F-5A, 1 KC-135, 1 P-3 and 5 SF.260.

The Yak-141 were a bit of a surprise. I wasn’t really paying much
attention to the Soviet aircraft having assumed them to be Forgers.
Nearly cost me a pair of F-18’s.

I had forgotten, at least for a while, about the available F-14s at
Cubi. By the time I realized my mistake they weren’t needed,

No other contact with submarines occurred. Looks like the replenishment
group passed the Charlie without being detected. The CVBG passed north
of the Victor’s patrol zone.

Good news for the follow on scenarios ( many I hope), AIM-54
expenditures were kept to 18.

On the down side neither group will make the rendezvous on schedule.

Definitely enjoyed the puzzle with this one. Thanks for sharing another
fun scenario\!
