**Portuguese Army**

The Portuguese army is a small conscript force which maintains key
functions at high readiness and maintains basic skill sets for rapid
mobilization. Structurally they have a Corps HQ, but in reality this
formation would function at the divisional level and either remain in
Portugal to enable mobilization or deploy with the Mechanized Brigade to
NATO’s Southern Army Group (SOUTHAG). The standing army was 44,000
personnel with about 175,000 reserves.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\pt\army\media\image1.png" style="width:7.05936in;height:2.84375in" />

The majority of the Portuguese Army is ‘light’. The units are either
specialized light infantry such as the Paratroop Brigade which is
controlled by the Air Force, the Marines which are controlled by the
Navy or the Commandos who are tasked by the national HQ, or lightly
equipped regional forces. The one mechanized formation ‘1a Brigada Mista
Independiente’ or 1<sup>st</sup> Mixed Brigade, has an armored battalion
(M60A3 TTS), a mechanized battalion (M-113) and a motorized battalion
(trucks). The garrison units are unique; they are based on a light
infantry battalion but have a battery of 105mm artillery, a
reconnaissance squadron and air defence.

[**M60A3 TTS Main Battle Tank
(MBT)**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M60_Patton#Variants)

The US provided Portugal with 93 M60A3 TTS as well as several bridge
layer, engineering, recovery and driver training variants in 1991. These
replaced M-48s which were returned to the US. This is a standard M60A3
with a Thermal imaging targeting site (TTS) added to improve night and
poor visibility operations. Most, (53) of these MBTs are in the Armored
Battalion of the Mixed Brigade while the remainder are in the Cavalry
(Reconnaissance) Squadron and training school.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\pt\army\media\image2.jpg" style="width:4.84375in;height:3.37814in" />

[**M113**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M113_armored_personnel_carrier)

The Mechanized Battalion of the Mixed Brigade operates 42 of the 123
M113 Armored Personnel Carriers in the Portuguese Army. Other variants
of this vehicle being used are the command post (M577), the TOW missile
carrier (M901), the 20mm Vulcan (M163A1) anti-aircraft system, the 107mm
mortar carrier (M106) and the 81mm mortar carrier (M125). The remainder
of the M113s are spread throughout the regional brigades and training
schools.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\pt\army\media\image3.jpeg" style="width:5.13542in;height:3.85135in" />

**Artillery**

Portugal employs a wide variety of artillery systems, mostly older towed
guns held in the schools and the reserves with two Self Propelled (SP)
batteries in the mixed brigade.

-   23x 5.5 inch guns

-   6x M109A2 SP 155mm Howitzer

-   40x M114/23 Towed 155mm Howitzer

-   60x M-101 Towed 105mm Howitzer

-   6x M108 SP 105mm Howitzer

<img src="/assets\images\nato\pt\army\media\image4.jpeg" style="width:5.47917in;height:3.0791in" />

5.5 Inch Gun

**Air Defence Systems**

Portugal has a large number of light air defence systems with the Vulcan
SP and RH202 systems in the active force and most of the remainder in
reserve forces.

-   332x Bofors, 40mmL/70 Towed AA Guns

-   30x RH202, 20mm Towed AA Guns

-   34x M163A1 20mm Vulcan SP AA Guns

-   57x Blowpipe SAM

<img src="/assets\images\nato\pt\army\media\image5.jpeg" style="width:4.19444in;height:3.14583in" />
