NATO/US Navy/ Amphibious Forces/Landing Craft

**Amphibious Landing Craft**

Landing craft are transported to the amphibious assault area by the much
larger landing ships, many in docking bays although some carried in the
traditional way on deck and swung into the water on divots. The purpose
of landing craft is to deliver Marines, equipment and supplies directly
to the beach.

**LCAC**: [Landing Craft Air
Cushion](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ship/lcac.htm). This is a very
large hovercraft designed to be launched from the well deck of
amphibious ships and deliver its cargo directly over the beach. The
inclusion of the LCAC fundamentally changed the way amphibious assaults
were conducted. Previously with conventional landing craft, only 17% of
all coastline was available for beach landing, and the large amphibious
ships would generally need to approach within 20 miles of the shoreline.
With the LCAC, over 80% of the worlds shoreline is usable and it can be
launched from over 50 miles offshore – significantly safer for the
larger ships. Historically 82 craft were built but initial funding was
granted for 91 and there was a requirement for about 114 (54 per coast,
6 in Japan, 2 for R\&D). In Northern Fury the authorized 91 have been
delivered to the Navy by 1994; 42 on the East Coast based at Little
Creek, 40 at Camp Pendleton California, 6 in Sasebo Japan with the 3
remaining used for R\&D and maintenance. Each LCAC can carry 60 Tons (75
Tons if overloaded) of equipment, they can be used to unload tanks one
at a time but are generally focused on delivering up to 4x LAV-25 (Light
Armored Vehicle with a 25mm gun), or up to 12 High Mobility Multipurpose
Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV) at a
time.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image1.jpg)

LCAC with 4 x LAV-25 and 2 x HUMVEE

**LCU**: [Landing Craft
Utility](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ship/lcu.htm). This heavy duty
but aging craft provide landing forces with reliable ship to shore
delivery of tanks and outsized vehicles such as bulldozers and heavy
trucks. The only class in USN is the LCU 1610 class (although the 1627
and 1646 are sub-classes with minor variations). There were [72
LCU 1610s built](http://shipbuildinghistory.com/smallships/lcu.htm) but
15 were converted to other purposes and a further three were sold,
leaving 54: 18 at Little Creek on the east coast, 18 at Camp Pendleton,
4 in Japan, 2 at Souda Bay Crete, 2 at Rota Spain, 2 at Guantanamo Bay
Cuba, 2 at Guam, 2 at Subic Bay Philippines, and the remaining 4 on
various other duties. Although the LCU can deliver up to 350 troops to
the beach, its main purpose is to deliver 2 x M-1A1 tanks to the beach
with additional cargo capacity to spare. An added feature is the ability
to link LCUs to create a causeway to quickly unload larger ships from
deeper
water.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image2.jpeg)
![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image3.jpg)

LCU loading and unloading M1A1 tanks.

**LCM**: [Landing Craft
Medium](http://www.navy.mil/navydata/fact_display.asp?cid=4200&tid=1600&ct=4).
The USN and the US Army have operated over [2200
LCMs](http://shipbuildinghistory.com/smallships/lcother2.htm) since the
1950’s. These versatile craft are primarily focused on ship to shore
unloading of general cargo and vehicles. They are not normally carried
on amphibious assault ships although they can be, they would usually be
found with the larger cargo and pre-positioning ships that would arrive
following the initial assault. The LCM-6 has a carrying capacity of 28
tons or 80 troops but is being phased out by 1994, all of this type
built in 1977 or later are available in reserve (48 east coast, 44 west
coast, 92 total). LCM-8 is a much more capable design with a 67-ton
capacity, it can carry every vehicle in a MEF except the M1A1 tank or up
to 200 troops. The US Army has maintained about 40 LCM-8’s (out of 526
originally, mostly used in Viet Nam), Spain has another 6, and the USN
has retained 261 of an original 547 boats, all but 74 being in reserve
at the start of the
war.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image4.jpeg)![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image5.jpg)

LCM-8’s

**Small Boats**: There are a myriad of small landing boats in the USN.
Although by 1994 all of the
[LCVPs](https://cs.stanford.edu/people/eroberts/courses/ww2/projects/fighting-vehicles/higgins-boat.htm)
(Landing Craft Vehicle and Personnel) had been retired, some of the
[2,000 built](http://shipbuildinghistory.com/smallships/lcother2.htm)
for the Viet Nam war remain in reserve. A more modern version of the
[LCPL](http://www.ussrankin.org/lcpl.htm) (Landing Craft Personnel
Large) was used for many interesting
[purposes](http://www.warboats.org/lcpl.htm). Of the 612 LCPLs produced,
some 200 are still active with another 125 in reserve. Replacing all of
these craft however is the RHIB (Ridged Hull Insatiable Boat), developed
initially for the British Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) in
the 60’s the technology became a mainstay for the Canadian Coast Guard
in the mid 70’s and in the US in the 80’s. The ease of production,
transport, shipping, deployment and modification quickly made this the
‘go-to’ technology for small boats. Historically the RHIB was slow to
be adopted in the USN, although Special Forces were using them in the
[early 90’s](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ship/rhib.htm), in Northern
Fury, the increased threat sped this adoption of this technology into
all arms and
services.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image6.jpg)

Heavily modified Viet Nam era
LCVP

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image7.jpg)

RHIBs

**AAVP**: [Amphibious Assault
Vehicle](https://fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/aavp7a1.htm). The USMC has
over 1300 AAV-7 amphibious tracked vehicles. Their role is to deliver
Marines to the beach in combat, and they can transition from boat to
tracked armored vehicle instantly upon landing. They carry 21 combat
troops and are armed with a .50 Caliber machine gun and grenade
launcher. While they are big, clumsy and have limitations on land, no
other vehicle in the inventory can load from the docking well of a
landing ship, maneuver through he sea and up onto dry land where it can
unload its marines in a sheltered area and provide fire support. Each
Marine battalion has a platoon of 13 AA-7s but they can be brigaded for
larger
operations.

![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image8.jpg)![](/assets/images/nato/us/navy/amphibious/landing-craft/image9.jpg)

AAV-7s
