**<u>Northern Fury \#10 – Eisenhower Moves North</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, Aug 2021</u>**

Following Enterprise’s success in blunting the Red Banner Fleet’s move
into the Atlantic, USS Eisenhower sails through the Straits of Gibraltar
to help relieve her. After three days’ hard fighting in the
Mediterranean, the battlegroup is currently dispersed for replenishment.
In this ‘not as Northern as usual’ episode, the Soviets try to take
advantage.  
  
You can play either side here, but I stuck with NATO for consistency. It
would be an interesting challenge as the Russians. As NATO, it is a
major logistical and organisational exercise and a bit of a slow-burner,
but absorbing and enjoyable nonetheless.  
  
Your surface forces are divided into five elements. Eisenhower is out in
front off SW Portugal with just the cruiser Vicksburg and the frigate
Halyburton for escort. The Portuguese frigate Corte Real is to the W
under your direct orders. Just departed from Rota in SW Spain are the
cruiser Virginia, destroyer Arleigh Burke, frigate De Wert, Spanish
frigate Numancia and the vital oiler Detroit. Still in the Med are the
cruiser San Jacinto and destroyer David R Ray. There are some worrying
shortages of equipment, such as SAMs and aircraft, with many of
Eisenhower’s fighters being re-programmed to use AMRAAMs at Rota and a
draft of replacement Hornets and Tomcats scheduled to make a long
journey across the Atlantic from the States with AI-controlled tanker
support.  
  
In the English Channel, you have the oiler Fort George, escorted by
frigates and fellow Brits Hermione and Beaver. These need to rendezvous
with the Eisenhower group at an Assembly Area W of Ireland within 48
hours.  
  
There are two American SSNs, Boston and Albuquerque, under your control
and these have to reach a patrol zone to the NW of the Assembly Area in
the same time limit.  
  
Various AI-controlled squadrons are around to provide support. The
Portuguese have the frigate Vasco da Gama and corvette Afonso Cerqueira
W of Lisbon, plus the diesel sub Barracuda in the Atlantic approaches.
Spain fields the frigates Baleares and Descubierta in the Straits of
Gibraltar, with the subs Marsopa and Sirocco respectively W and E of
here. In the Bay of Biscay, there is a French squadron, comprising three
unconvincing destroyers (Tourville, Primauguet and Aconit), while the
elderly British SSN Churchill is patrolling the Assembly Area. Some
useful Spanish and Portuguese Orions are helping patrol the waters off
the Iberian coast, supplementing three Rota-based American P-3 Upgrades
under your direct control.  
  
To complicate matters further, there are convoys in the Bay of Biscay
and Western Mediterranean with just one weak corvette each for escort,
as well as two single merchant ships (Wild Rover and Nordanger),
wandering around in the Atlantic.  
  
Another layer of detail is the need for replenishment flights to the
Eisenhower from a number of sources, with Greyhounds ferrying supplies
from Rota, Sea Knights from the Detroit and potentially Sea Kings from
the Fort George if it ever gets near enough.  
  
The Soviets are known to have 12-18 submarines of various types in the
region, including at least one Oscar and Echo with Shipwreck and Sandbox
anti-shipping missiles. As your ships will need to move quite fast to
reach their target zones, there is a heightened risk of torpedo
ambushes.  
Once N of the English Channel, you are warned that the enemy have around
30 long-range bombers available, probably Badgers with Kingfish
missiles, plus recon and OECM planes. There is an exclusion zone around
Iceland and the Faroes (the latter having fallen since Plug the Gap),
though how far this affects enemy movement is uncertain at the start. At
least there is no danger from Soviet fighters or surface warships, the
latter having withdrawn since their unpleasant experiences in Hold the
Line.  
  
It’s important to do your sums in this scenario!. Clearly, pushing ahead
in the starting groups is dumb, as you will be exposed to defeat in
detail with inadequate cover. You urgently need to re-group your forces
first, then get to the Assembly Area afterwards. Some calculations
showed that the Detroit, moving at her Full Speed of 24 knots, could do
so with a decent comfort margin, so I decided to have the Eisenhower and
Corte Real elements close on her, actually moving AWAY from the Assembly
Area to begin-with. The San Jacinto group would need to move at maybe
22.5 knots on average to get to the AA on time. I decided to have
everyone start at Creep for the first half-hour in case of immediate
ambushes, then have San Jacinto accelerate to Flank as circumstances
allowed. As units joined-up with the Detroit, they would conform to her
24-knot pace. This was still worryingly fast, given the sub threat, but
I hoped to offset this by littering the sea with buoys and making hourly
checks on my levels of ASW cover.  
  
Fort George starts rather exposed and it’s hard for her to maintain ASW
cover with her three short-ranged choppers. On the positive side, she
has less far to go and it proved possible to chug along at 8-10 knots
and try to follow the swathe of sonobuoys set-up by escorting
AI-controlled British Nimrods out of St Mawgan in Cornwall (there are
also some British Hawk trainers with Sidewinders at Valley on Anglesey,
which might be some use against Badgers overflying the UK).  
  
The two US subs also have a race on their hands to reach their PZ.
Moving at Creep is impractical, though I did so for the initial
half-hour. After this, they went to maximum depth to avoid cavitation
issues and headed N at 25 knots, though this meant that their towed
arrays were useless.  
  
As for the convoys and single sailings, they would have to take their
chances until I could spare more /assets to look after them.  
  
In general, I put as many aircraft as possible on ASW loadouts and kept
ships’ radars dark to foil detection, notably from a Soviet spy
satellite that regularly traverses the map. Supplies of air-air missiles
are low, so I had to put some Tomcats on basic ‘light’ or ‘peacetime’
settings.  
  
19/2/94 01:00 Zulu Time: After a quiet opening hour, broken only by
biologic subsurface contacts, a Kilo ambushed the Vasco da Gama and
Cerqueira. The result was a total wipe-out, which cost me 20 VP and the
Russians 5. Vasco’s chopper survived to fly patrols from Beja airbase on
the mainland. Meanwhile, Greyhound flights began to arrive at the
Eisenhower – these happen continuously throughout the game and score no
points, serving only as a distraction.  
  
02:00: Just as San Jacinto deemed it safe to accelerate to Flank, a
second Kilo popped-up and loosed unsuccessfully at the Spanish sub
Sirocco nearby. Ray’s Seahawk engaged and sank her for 5 VP, but had to
use both her torpedoes, leaving her squadron out of ASW cover for an
hour or so. Relied on speed and made the dash.  
  
05:00: A Victor III ambushed the Detroit group and sank the Numancia for
18 VP, including a chopper. The frigate’s Seahawk took revenge, but this
scored just 10 points, plus another 5 for a third Kilo, which appeared
nearby and was dispatched by an Orion from Rota. The Spanish chopper
appropriately re-based to the De Wert. Both Soviet subs needed two hits
to kill.  
  
07:00: A Spanish Orion found and sank a fourth Kilo SW of the Straits of
Gibraltar. Not long afterwards, Corte Real got close enough to merge
into the Eisenhower group (select frigate, then hold Shift and select
the CVBG, then use Units:Group Ops). This necessitated some
re-definition of ASW missions. Later on, Detroit also made the
rendezvous. This prompted a message ordering me to detach the Vicksburg
and Halyburton to Brest for replenishment. As I was still off SW
Portugal, I deferred this to a more appropriate time…  
  
I reckoned I could reach the AA with about eight hours to spare, so long
as no ships got damaged, of course. San Jacinto should be able to
catch-up long before I would need to detach Vicksburg.  
  
10:00: The Portuguese sub Barracuda detected a dozy Victor II some way
WSW of the fleet and held the fort long enough for a Viking to arrive
and destroy the Russian for another 10 VP.  
  
13:00: The MV Wild Rover was torpedoed by a submarine SW of Ireland,
costing 10 VP. We had no ASW /assets nearby.  
  
15:00: An Orion, previously searching the approaches to Brest for
anything waiting to ambush Vicksburg, reached the scene of the Wild
Rover sinking. The Victor III responsible had stayed local and died of a
bad dose of ASW torpedo.  
  
16:00: Action stations as a flight of Shipwreck missiles suddenly
came-in, dangerously close, from the W of the fleet!. Thankfully, there
were just five and copious use of SAMs and some hastily-scrambled
fighters disposed of them. Was the Oscar short of ammo, maybe due to
participation in the attacks on the Eastern Seaboard?. Put-up a Hawkeye
to watch for any more (having been using them sparingly due to their
lousy endurance). Not long afterwards, San Jacinto caught-up and
conformed to the 24-knot fleet speed. A pair of Hercules tankers
lifted-off from the States, heading for St Mawgan.  
  
18:00: A pair of Sandbox missiles came-in from the NNW and it took a
disproportionate amount of effort to stop the lucky beggars. Again, why
just two, as an Echo carries eight?.  
  
19:00: Three more pairs of Sandboxes approached in succession, but
lacked their counterparts’ good fortune and were easily picked-off by
CAP. One Echo de-fanged. A third Victor III appeared S of the fleet and
fell victim to a Portuguese Orion.  
  
21:00: As replacement Hornets and Tomcats began to launch from the
States, a shoal of 19 Shipwrecks hurtled-in at 1,600 knots from the WSW.
The Oscar hadn’t been out of ammo, but she was now!. A major effort from
Phoenix-toting Tomcats stopped any getting close, but supplies of that
missile type were now desperately low. The Oscar was now less of a
threat and probably wouldn’t be able to catch us – but was she the only
one?  
  
20/2/94 00:00: Had to amend ASW missions to stop Vikings heading to
tankers in mid-Atlantic and compromising the replacement flights. I’d
assigned one of the Rota Orions, now re-based to St Mawgan, to protect
the convoy in the Bay of Biscay, but she couldn’t remain on-station all
the time and, as fate would have it, was just returning for a second
patrol when a Victor I attacked. Two merchant ships were lost and two
more damaged. The Orion arrived and exacted retribution, but it cost us
a net 10 VP. Thankfully, the damaged ships stayed afloat.  
  
Meanwhile, an old Tango sub appeared in the AA near HMS Churchill, which
got first shot and sank this particular ‘Rattlesnake of the Atlantic’
for 5 VP.  
  
01:00: Began sending Eisenhower’s less-capable fighters to St Mawgan to
clear hangar space and prepare a hot reception for any Badgers
overflying the UK.  
  
02:00: The AI-controlled Barracuda torpedoed a whale!. Thankfully, this
cost no points, but I reviewed all my ASW settings and set them from
Weapons Free to Weapons Tight where necessary. Fighters and the
Stateside Hercules began to reach St Mawgan (the tankers had to be
switched from Ferry settings).  
  
03:00: Fighters from Oceana began to reach the Eisenhower. Relieved that
the AI had managed to handle the mid-ocean refuelling (thanks, Bart), I
assigned them loadouts, as they’d travelled without missiles to save
weight. The Hornets could use AMRAAMs and we had 40 planes’ worth
on-board.  
  
04:00: A chopper from the previously-maligned French destroyer
Primauguet did me a huge favour by finding and sinking a dangerous
Sierra SSN for 10 VP.  
  
05:00: Now out in the Bay of Biscay, I detached Vicksburg and Halyburton
to Brest, recalling their ASW planes and creating new missions for them.
Orions provided further support.  
  
06:00: More replacement fighters, loaded with AMRAAMs, began leaving
Rota for the fleet. I launched a Hercules tanker from Rota in support,
though she wasn’t needed in practice.  
  
08:00: Primauguet’s chopper excelled herself again by getting rid of the
Echo (15 VP), which was trying to reach us for a torpedo attack. The
French weren’t so useless after all!.  
  
10:00: Fort George was now close enough for her choppers to start flying
supplies to Eisenhower.  
  
11:00: With the fleet now getting into the danger zone, my thoughts were
dominated by the risk of a 30-plane Badger strike with Kingfish,
supported by SEAD planes. I began running an active CAP over NE England
from St Mawgan and sent the base a Hawkeye in support. However, I
couldn’t ignore the possibility that the enemy might approach from
Iceland, despite the Exclusion Zone, which might only apply to us. That
lack of Hawkeye endurance was a handicap and I had to use lightly-armed
fighters to plug the gaps.  
  
15:00: Albuquerque reached the PZ for 25 VP and went to Creep, Just Over
the Layer.  
  
16:00: The fleet reached the AA, scoring 10 VP per frigate, 15 for
destroyers, 25 for cruisers, 35 for oilers and 50 for the carrier. By
now, we had detected Badgers airborne S of Iceland and moved one of the
St Mawgan Hercules to support CAP in this direction.  
  
17:00: With the Fort George group joining the fleet in the AA, I obeyed
orders and sent the frigate Hermione back towards Portsmouth with her
own ASW support mission. Meanwhile, Vicksburg and Halyburton reached
Brest, with no sign of an ambush and scored another 15 VP. They now had
to wait there for six hours to score some more for completing their
re-fit.  
  
18:00: Enemy coded messages were intercepted, suggesting an attack was
imminent. It was pretty obvious from early in the game that an
Irish-flagged trawler called the Jumping Leprechaun was the culprit due
to her emissions levels, but she showed-up as Neutral and I felt it to
be in the spirit of the scenario to spare her the Harpooning she
deserved. She was out of sensor range and moving away, anyway, as my
radars remained dark.  
  
19:00: USS Boston reached the PZ for another 25 VP.  
  
20:00: Went after the Russian aircraft S of Iceland with my Tomcats,
nailing a couple of Badgers and sending the others running, but this
scored no points. Enemy jamming again made their OECM planes almost
impossible to attack and using my Prowlers made no difference. There was
a concern that the Russians were being canny and sending Badgers quietly
around to the W of the fleet for a surprise attack, so I stationed a few
fighters in this quarter.  
  
22:00: Aggressive Tomcat patrols accounted for a third Badger, the
Exclusion Zone not keeping-out missiles, but endurance considerations
stopped me doing more.  
  
23:00: Scored another 25 VP for completing the Vicksburg group’s
replenishment and started them back to the fleet. Probably because of my
jamming and lack of radar emissions, no Soviet airstrike materialised
and the game ended in a Triumph, with a score of +357.  
  
NATO lost two frigates, a corvette, three merchant ships and two
choppers, while the USSR lost 12 assorted subs and three Badgers.  
  
The next one seems to be a similar affair with the Carl Vinson replacing
the Enterprise, but perhaps without the replenishment issues. It’ll be
nice to get properly on the offensive after this, maybe...
