**Northern Fury 10 -Eisenhower moves North**

19 February 1994, 0000 Zulu, 0000 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf10\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:8.12708in" alt="Image" />

Entering the sixth day of a new global war between East and West, the
situation is starting to stabilize. The ground war in Europe is still
undecided but NATO forces in CENTAG (Central Army Group) have blunted
the main Soviet advance somewhat, while the air war over Germany has
seen the loss of hundreds of NATO aircraft.

The situation in the North Atlantic remains desperate. The rapid capture
of North Norway and Iceland have allowed the Soviets to surge almost 100
submarines into the Atlantic. The USS Enterprise CVBG spent two
difficult days blunting an attempt by the Red Banner Northern Fleet to
interdict the sea lanes, she is now retiring, as are the major Soviet
surface units, to replenish.

Now, as Enterprise steams South, the **USS Eisenhower**, after three
days of hard fighting in the Mediterranean, has passed through he
pillars of Hercules and is heading North. She and the USS Carl Vinson
CVBG will strike at Soviet forces around Iceland three days from now.

This scenario is playable by either WP or NATO:

As the NATO player you must re-assemble and reinforce your BG as it is
dispersed over several hundred miles due to replenishment demands. Two
ships are still in the Med after conducting hasty repairs in Toulon,
while a major portion of the force is escorting AOE Detroit and is just
departing Rota. Most of your F/A-18s are in Rota Spain undergoing an
upgrade, and you can expect replacements for your losses to fly in from
NAS Oceania tomorrow. Finally, you must link up with HMS Fort George in
a designated assembly area in preparation for your strike on Iceland.

As the WP player you have multiple submarines and other /assets and your
task is to disrupt the assembly of the Eisenhower BG and inflict
casualties on NATO, while at the same time preserving your force.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf10\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.65625in" alt="Russian Navy Submarine Surfaces Off Alaska; Likely Same One That Fired Cruise Missile Earlier In Exercise" />

**<u>Northern Fury \#10</u>** is a very asymmetric fight. The Ike (USS
Eisenhower) has a long way to go, and a short time to get there, with
many tasks and hurdles in her way. The Soviets on the other had will be
hard pressed to compromise the impressive defences of a US carrier
battle group – so they need to strike while the group is dispersed.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart1\nf10\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.31042in" alt="The fast combat support ship USS DETROIT (AOE-4) is flanked by the aircraft carrier USS" />
