**Pacific Fury**

Pacific Fury is a large battleset which is critical to the *Northern
Fury* story and runs in parallel to the campaigns in central and
northern Europe and other regions. Although a sideshow for the Soviets
this is a critical theater for the United States. Maintaining secure
alliances with Pacific Rim partners is a critical national security
objective in Washington and any threat to those relationships is
threated very seriously.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\pf\image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:8.73056in" alt="Map Description automatically generated" />

The US and its allies are dispersed at the start of hostilities, the US
Navy has seven aircraft carriers in the Pacific Fleet but two of those
are in the Indian Ocean and will either remain there or transfer into
the Atlantic, another is transiting to the Indian Ocean, one is
stationed in Japan, one is training in the Philippians and two are on
the west coast. Both Britain and France are at a low ebb of military
elements available while Japan, South Korea and Australia are scrambling
to muster their forces.

The Soviet intend to tie down US forces in particular in order to weaken
any deployments to NATO. Although Soviet forces in the Pacific are
substantial, they are hemmed in geographically and have limited
strategic reach. The base at Cam Ranh Bay Vietnam is the exception to
this and there are plans to make as much use out of that location as
possible.

There are fifteen scenarios in the series, four are played from the
Soviet side, one as the North Korean while the remainder are from either
a US or South-East Asian perspective.

1.  Bolt from the Blue, An ambush meant to quickly sink the Japanese
    based US aircraft carrier.

2.  Bombeska on Hokkaido, Soviet strike on Japanese forces on Hokkaido
    Island (Soviet player)

3.  Caught Flat Footed, Soviet SAG ambushes a US aircraft carrier near
    the Philippines

4.  I come from a land Down Under, ANAZC led convoy to Bruni

5.  Shemya Shakedown, Soviet strike on the Aleutian Island of Shmya
    (Soviet player)

6.  Priorities, SE Asia combined strike on Cam Ranh Bay covering a
    convoy to Hong Kong

7.  Crap Shoot, Counter Piracy operations in the Straits of Malacca

8.  We've got ourselves a convoy, A major convoy to Japan and South
    Korea

9.  The Hermit Kingdom, A Pre-emptive attack from North Korea (Played by
    North Korea)

10. Kuril Crackdown, USN double carrier strike on the Kuril Islands

11. You sank my Battleship, USS New Jersey is ambushed in the Philippian
    Sea (Soviet player)

12. Wolfpack, TBC (Soviet player)

13. TBC, TBC

14. Island Hopping 101, TBC

15. Vlad the Impaled, TBC
