**Northern Fury 25 Jar Heads on Ice!**

26 February 1994, 0800 Zulu, 0600 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf25\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.64306in" alt="A picture containing outdoor, water, ship, watercraft Description automatically generated" />

Earlier this morning the Battleships were unleashed to further reduce
the defenders combat power and Marine Force Recon element went in to
secure key areas. Late yesterday a Battalion landing team (1st BN 6th
Marines) seized the airport at Vestmannaeyjar, which has been built up
and is ready to receive F/A-18s. The moment is finally here – your job
is to conduct simultaneous amphibious landing of 6<sup>th</sup> and
8<sup>th</sup> Regimental Combat Teams (RCT-6 and RCT-8) of the
2<sup>nd</sup> Marine Expeditionary Force (II MEF).

As Commander 2<sup>nd</sup> Fleet you have moved north in your Command
ship (LCC 20 Mount Whitney) to oversee this operation. Under your direct
command are the majority of the Amphibious forces in the Atlantic Fleet,
the two Battleships which saw action earlier, the USS Theodore Roosevelt
CVBG, and several independent elements. Providing a distant screen for
this operation (and not in this scenario) are the USS Carl Vinson, USS
Eisenhower, and HMS Invincible CVBGs. Speed is of the essence, all of
these High Value Units (HVU) concentrated in a small area are a magnet
for trouble.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf25\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.65625in" alt="LCAC Air-Cushion Vehicle Landing &amp;amp; Unloading LAV-25 Amphibious Vehicle - YouTube" />
**<u>Northern Fury \#25</u>** is a large and diverse scenario where the
player will need to juggle conflicting requirements in at least two
areas. The player has many unique units and overwhelming resources at
their disposal but will have difficulty making sure that the right
element is in the right place with the right equipment at the right
time. Not an easy task.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\nf\nfpart2\nf25\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.26389in" alt="USN – Retired Landing Ships – The Searchers" />
