**<u>Northern Fury \#12 – Command at Sea</u>**

**<u>AAR by fitzpatv, Sept 2021</u>**

This smallish and not very Northern scenario shares the same timeframe
as Eisenhower Moves North and Changing of the Guard. Admiral Falkner,
the commander of the US 2nd Fleet (CINCLANT) is aboard USS Mount
Whitney, en route for a holding area just W of the Azores. This is
partly in the interests of ‘dispersal’, should the conflict go nuclear.
Mount Whitney is an advanced comms ship and a high-value asset in her
own right. The Soviets get wind of this and send subs to intercept. You
can play either side.  
  
Approaching the Azores from the W, Mount Whitney may be sophisticated,
but she’s essentially a floating target. Sailing in close escort are the
destroyer Dewey and the frigate Elrod. These provide a good SAM
umbrella, but the whole task group has just two ASW choppers –
short-ranged Seasprites at that. Away to the SE is the older frigate
Reasoner, which has another Seasprite, but no SAMs, while the Portuguese
frigate Alvares Cabral is to the E, with two Lynx choppers and
reasonable all-round capability. The aged SSN Sturgeon is in the holding
area and there are three Orions based at the central Azorean island of
Lajes. Overall, there aren’t enough ASW /assets to provide continuous
cover and these resources have to be used sparingly.  
  
The Russians have an Echo-class SSGN with eight long-range Sandbox
missiles, plus a Victor III and Sierra II and certain other /assets,
which are revealed as the game progresses.  
  
19/2/94 13:00Z: I began by creating new ASW patrol zones for each ship
or TF, assigning an Orion to escort Mount Whitney instead of
checking-out the holding area (leaving the latter task to the Sturgeon).
Decided to launch two Seasprites and a Lynx at the outset to give each
element some initial sonobuoy cover, though this proved unnecessary. I
also switched my third Orion, still readying, from maritime surveillance
to ASW and ensured that all units and missions were on Weapons Tight to
avoid shooting at neutrals or biologics. Kept radars dark to limit enemy
detection.  
  
Presently, a mysterious Mi-14 Haze chopper appeared near the Western
Azorean islands of Flores and Corvo. Quite how this had got there was
baffling, but it seemed unlikely to be a threat to Sturgeon on range
grounds and was probably there for recon purposes. Without any fighters,
there was little I could do about it for now.  
  
Mount Whitney was lagging behind her escorts and I had to do some
messing around to re-position her more securely between them. As so
often, it was necessary to untick the ‘Group Lead can Slow Down’ box to
avoid chaos.  
  
15:00 : Having scouted the vicinity, the choppers went off-mission and
were henceforward held in readiness to conserve sorties. I was concerned
about detecting any incoming Sandboxes with radars off and could only
hope that the missiles’ own sensors would give them away in time.  
  
17:00 : A Soviet sub got the drop on Sturgeon and sank her with one of
their deadly 22nm range Starfish torpedo-carrying missiles for a loss of
50VP. As Victors have even longer-ranged Stallions, chances are that the
Sierra was responsible. Living in Scotland as I do, I couldn’t resist a
smile… An Orion was sent to scour the area, but the sub was long gone by
the time it arrived – the search continued. With hindsight, Sturgeon
should perhaps have high-tailed it out of the patrol zone earlier.  
  
Shortly afterwards, the trigger-happy Echo wasted two Sandboxes sinking
a Portuguese trawler, the Vista Alegre. This suggested that she lurked
away to the SE, perhaps not too far away from Reasoner. One to watch if
you play the Russians (put her on Weapons Tight).  
  
18:30 : Reports arrived that ‘Spanish-speaking contractors’ had seized
control of the remote village of Caldeirao on the small island of Corvo,
killing several local folk. The Portuguese authorities requested our
assistance, but there wasn’t much we could do for the moment.  
  
23:00 : US SEALs on the Mount Whitney and Portuguese special forces at
Lajes were detailed to investigate the Corvo situation. An old Aviocar
transport needed to be flown from Lajes with the latter squad and could
deliver them by overflying the S half of the island at 1,000’. Mount
Whitney’s HH-60 SAR Seahawk would be ready in an hour to transport the
SEALs. I was advised that her TV sensors might prove useful and that
naval gunfire would be necessary to finish the job, so I routed Cabral
to the island.  
  
20/2/94 00:00 : ASW patrols finally bore fruit, with an Orion finding
and sinking a Victor III in the holding area for 50VP.  
  
01:00 : The Aviocar smoothly inserted the Portuguese special forces on
Corvo, but they could not initially see anything. I had them climb to
the island’s highest point, but this made no difference.  
  
02:00 : An Orion found and sank the Sierra in the holding area. After
the game, I read the Russian briefing and found that this was actually a
Sierra III and their navy’s best SSN. As there is little data on a class
that was never built, Bart represented it as a Sierra II with an Ace
crew, which was why it scored 100VP.  
  
06:00 : Approaching the holding area, Mount Whitney came within
detection range of the Haze. I should have put my radars on
straightaway, but didn’t and was caught a little flat-footed by the
Echo’s prompt response, much as the AI often is when its task groups
have radars off. I was lucky that the SSGN had to loose its six
remaining Sandboxes in widely-spaced pairs and that the first of these
targetted Elrod, the weaker of the two escorts. Unable to react quickly
enough, the frigate was sunk, but this cost only 25VP. With radars now
on, USS Dewey was able to dispose of the remaining four missiles.
Unfortunately, both Seasprites had been aboard Elrod, which cost no
points, but left Mount Whitney dependent on Dewey’s sonar and ASROC
system should the Echo close to its admittedly short torpedo range, as
it was no doubt hastening to do. On the positive side, we now had a good
idea where it was and two Orions winged to the hunt. Reasoner moved in
at Creep with her chopper in readiness.  
  
07:00 : The HH-60 reached Corvo and promptly located the enemy, who
proved to consist of a squad of Cuban irregulars, a remarkably sturdy
Soviet Kolchuga ELINT vehicle (75DP!) and a helipad base for the Haze,
which was still on patrol. A shambles ensued as, despite dropping to
minimum altitude and hover speed over the island, the Seahawk failed
miserably to land the SEALs!. Instead, I attacked the Cuban troops with
the Portuguese. This did for most of them but, despite taking no return
fire, the Portuguese soon ran out of ammo and had to pull back. In
disgust, I had the chopper take-off, re-based her to the ‘neutral’ Corvo
airfield to avoid RTB problems and finished the Cubans off by hosing
them down with her machine-gun (had to do this manually due to otherwise
insuperable doctrine issues). I then solved the problem with the SEALs
by the desperate guess of moving the chopper to Corvo airfield and
descending/hovering there. All of this could have been made clearer in
the briefings.  
  
08:00 : The Haze finally returned from patrol and was shot down by
Cabral’s SAMs, not that this scored any points. The frigate bombarded
the helipad, but didn’t do much damage before running out of shells.  
  
09:00 : The search of the Echo’s likely location paid-off and she was
sunk by an Orion for 75VP. You do learn to love these elderly but so
reliable patrol planes – at least when they’re on your side!  
  
Meanwhile, the SEALs did a good impression of the Keystone Cops,
attacking the helipad with four charges of high explosive and failing to
do any damage!!. They then crossed the island and didn’t quite manage to
kill the ELINT vehicle with their remaining charge. SEALs play a major
role in the next scenario and this did not exactly fill me with
confidence…  
  
12:00 : Scored 100VP for Mount Whitney reaching the approximate centre
of the holding area – it wasn’t at all clear what the trigger for this
was.  
  
20:00 : Reasoner arrived off Corvo, destroyed the Kolchuga for 10VP,
then heavily damaged the helipad before running out of ammo. Sent her to
join Mount Whitney.  
  
21/2/94 01:00 : Sent Dewey to finish the job at the helipad, but she
failed to do so.  
  
I then re-assembled all ships in the middle of the holding area and ran
down the clock for a Major Victory, with a score of +265. Could probably
have got a Triumph by keeping Sturgeon alive or destroying the helipad
and not losing Elrod. Regardless, three more Soviet subs had been
eliminated for one of ours and a frigate and the enemy’s plans to sink
Mount Whitney and establish a base on Corvo had been thwarted.  
  
Next time, NATO goes on the offensive at long last...
