**British Army**

The British Army is a diverse organization with long standing traditions
and global commitments. One of the key components is the ‘British Army
on the Rhine’ BAOR, which commanded all British troops on continental
Europe and took on the responsibilities of NORTHAG HQ in wartime
(Northern Army Group). More detail can be found at this
[link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NORTHAG_wartime_structure_in_1989).
In all likelihood at least one French Corps would come under command
NORTAG as well.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image1.png" style="width:4.59375in;height:4.50069in" />

In addition to the BAOR the British Army had significant forces
stationed at home. Some were tasked with reinforcing BAOR while others
had Home Defence tasks or responsibility for security in Northern
Ireland. Upon mobilization it was expected that units moving to Germany
would arrive and be ready for combat within 72 hours, this was tested on
several major exercises and was well planned and rehearsed. The ‘TA’
(Territorial Army) elements are the equivalent of National Guard,
Militia or Reserve forces in other nations. Reinforcement to Germany
included 30 Engineer Bde to provide general support engineering to
NORTHAG, 1<sup>st</sup> Infantry Bde reinforced HQ Schleswig-Holstein in
northern Germany and 5<sup>th</sup> Airborne Bde which became a general
reserve unit for tasking by SHAPE. If the AMF(L) (ACE\[Allied Command
Europe\] Mobile Force –Land) deployed to Norway the British Battle Group
would accompany it, if not this unit would reinforce BAOR. Home defence
units, in addition to security elements, would form a recruiting and
training base for replacements into BAOR.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image2.png" style="width:6.63542in;height:3.0242in" />

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image3.png" style="width:3.15347in;height:2.27986in" />Another
key role for the British Army is maintenance of overseas garrisons. Each
one is unique and has evolved into its current form through diplomatic
commitments, changes to the local threat and availability of forces. The
Falklands garrison was only a 45 man Royal Marine platoon when Argentina
invaded; the reinforced Battalion Group currently residing there is much
more of a deterrent. Exercises are a key factor in these overseas
deployments and units tasked to deploy on a rotation, do so with the
intent of achieving meaningful training objectives while stationed
abroad. To facilitate this there are established housekeeping units in
each garrison as well as Kenya and Canada where units deploy
specifically for training opportunities.

Finally elements that are not strictly within the Army but which occupy
the land environment and therefore share some training and equipment
similarities with the Army are shown below. The RAF Regt is primarily
dedicated to airfield and nuclear storage site security. The Royal
Marine Commando Bde is a unit of the Royal Navy (RN) and able to deploy
globally, and routinely trains with an attached Dutch Battalion for
deployment to Norway. The SAS (Special Air Service), along with the SBS
(Special Boat Service) controlled by the RN, are the UK’s globally
deployable Special Forces element.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image4.png" style="width:7.18025in;height:2.73958in" />

**Main Battle Tank (MBT)**

[**Challenger 2**](http://www.military-today.com/tanks/challenger_2.htm)

Historically this tank was not integrated into the British Army until
1998, but the first tanks were produced in 1994, three years after being
ordered, followed by a further three years of trials and testing.
Northern Fury has the first 70 already produced, enough to equip one
Tank Regt (Bn) in BAOR. The Challenger 2 marks a significant improvement
in MBT capability for the British Army, it has a 120mm rifled gun as
opposed to the smooth bore on the Leopard 2, AMX Leclerc or Abrams M1A1
or A2 Abrams, allowing the use of HESH (High Explosive Squash Head)
ammunition for supporting infantry and ‘bunker busting’. As far as
protection, the Challenger 2 with its improved Chobham armour is, in
1994, probably the most heavily protected tank in the world, others
tanks with add on armor improvements, would soon catch up.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image5.png" style="width:5.17708in;height:2.94053in" />

[**Challenger 1**](http://fighting-vehicles.com/challenger-1-tank/)

The British Army operated 420
[versions](http://www.military-today.com/tanks/challenger_1.htm) of this
tank which also had a 120mm gun, the original form of Chobham armour and
reasonable mobility. Its direct competitors for this generation of tank
– the Leopard 1 and Abrams M1A1, were faster, and more agile – but less
protected and only had a 105mm gun.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image6.jpeg" style="width:4.85417in;height:3.24469in" />

[**Chieftain**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/UK/chieftain.php)

Although old, this 1960’s era tank was cutting edge when produced and
was regularly upgraded. It carried the same 120mm rifled gun as the
Challengers but its armour was of welded steel construction and
therefore much less capable than the composite armour of its successors.
870 Chieftains, plus a large number of bridge-layers, recovery vehicles
and engineering vehicles were still in service in 1994. Over 400 were in
storage and available for use, as were 570 of the older Centurion tanks.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image7.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.35139in" />

**Infantry Fighting Vehicles (IFV)/Armoured Personnel Carriers (APC)**

[**Warrior
IFV**](https://www.militaryfactory.com/armor/detail.asp?armor_id=27)

Initially [delivered in
1988](http://tanknutdave.com/the-british-warrior-mcv/), the full order
of 1053 was filled in the Northern Fury world (vice the historic
reduction to 789) with the last examples coming off the assembly line in
the spring of 1994. Representing a quantum leap in capability over the
FV-432 series of APC, the Warrior added a 30mm cannon to the firepower
of an infantry section, and significantly improved protection and
mobility as well. Several command, observation and repair vehicles were
also produced.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image8.jpeg" style="width:5.53125in;height:3.67769in" />

[**FV-432**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FV432)

The FV-432 is the British answer to the American M113 APC, the basic
version can carry 10 soldiers in addition to the 2-man crew. Built in
several variants this is a versatile and adaptable vehicle but generally
underpowered. Early production examples, the Mk1 was produced with a
gasoline (petrol) engine, most of these have since been replaced by a
two stroke multi-fuel engine; still underpowered but more sustainable
within the NATO supply system. Over 2400 are in service throughout the
British Army.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image9.jpg" style="width:5.03125in;height:3.30212in" />

**[CVR-T](http://tanknutdave.com/the-british-cvrt-family/): Combat
Vehicle Reconnaissance (Tracked)**

This is a prolific family of vehicles conducting all manner of tasks
within the British Army. The seven main variants are in use in 1994:

-   [**FV101
    Scorpion**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/UK/Alvis_Scorpion.php):
    Reconnaissance vehicle with 76mm gun, \~1500 in use including 184
    with the RAF Regt;

-   [**FV102
    Striker**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/UK/Alvis_Striker.php):
    Anti-Tank variant with a Swingfire missile system, 89 in use;

-   [**FV103 Spartan**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FV103_Spartan):
    APC with a 3-man crew and 4 passengers, 691 in use;

-   [**FV104
    Samaritan**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FV104_Samaritan):
    Ambulance variant, 50 in use;

-   [**FV105 Sultan**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FV105_Sultan):
    Command and control vehicle, 291 in use;

-   [**FV106 Samson**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FV106_Samson):
    Armoured Recovery Vehicle (ARV), 136 in use;

-   [**FV107
    Scimitar**](http://www.tanks-encyclopedia.com/coldwar/UK/Alvis_Scimitar.php):
    Reconnaissance vehicle with a 30mm cannon, 334 in service;

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image10.jpg" style="width:3.28125in;height:2.1875in" />

[**Saxon**](http://www.military-today.com/apc/saxon.htm)

Essentially an armoured 4-wheel drive truck, this ‘battle taxi’ is able
to deliver a section of troops in relative protection but with limited
off road mobility. 527 of them are in service.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image11.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.28681in" />

[**Saracen**](http://tanknutdave.com/the-british-fv-601-saladin-a-fv-603-saracen/)

Another ‘battle taxi’, this 6-wheeled APC introduced in the mid 50’s had
several variants. Only about 300 of them are left in service in 1994.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image12.jpg" style="width:5in;height:3.49952in" />

**Artillery**

The Royal Artillery fielded some 42 units in the British Army including
air defence. The M109’s were historically sold to Austria in late 1994
however that deal was not offered in this storyline. Instead Close
Support Regiments in maneuver brigades were equipped to war strength of
24 guns 155mm guns each (AS-90 or M-109), except for two units of 105mm
Abbots in that role. The remainder of the Abbots were put in reserve.
The Light Guns support of the light role brigades, the Pack howitzers
support the Airborne elements, and the remainder are for General Support
to Divisions and 1 BR Corps. The MLRS arrived for service in 1992.

-   200x Abbot 105mm Self Propelled (SP) Howitzers (in reserve);

-   212x 105mm Towed Light Guns (Howitzers)

-   51x M-56 Pack Howitzers

-   145x M109A2 155mm SP Howitzers (not sold to Austria in 1994);

-   179x AS-90 155mm SP Howitzers (all delivered by spring 1994);

-   72x FH-70 155mm Towed Howitzers

-   37x M107 175mm SP Howitzers;

-   16x M110 203mm SP Howitzers;

-   24x MLRS systems

<img src="/assets\images\nato\uk\army\image13.jpg" style="width:4.22222in;height:2.63889in" />

**Air Defence**

Also operated by the Royal Artillery (RA) with the exception of the
Rapier SAMs operated by the RAF Regt

-   50x Rapier SP

-   72x Rapier Towed operated by the RA

-   72x Rapier Towed operated by the RAF Regt

-   Blowpipe and Javelin MANPADS
