**Caribbean Fury \#4 Show of Force, 1994**

19 Feb 1994, 1800 Zulu, 1400 Local

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf4\media\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:2.83819in" alt="Stealth appears on Red Flag&amp;#39;s Radar" />

The threat from Cuba, Honduras and Nicaragua have now been neutralized,
the insurgency in Belize has at least been contained and the one in
Panama has petered out, so the Soviets only have one major player
remaining in the region. Venezuela, however, is playing a dangerous game
with both sides in the conflict. Although they are outwardly neutral,
there is a supposedly secret Soviet airbase on Venezuelan soil, and
Soviet submarines continue to replenish in Venezuelan ports. The US and
NATO know this, but don’t want to expand the war. The Venezuelan people
however don’t know about this, or at least they haven’t been told and
those that do know don’t wish to acknowledge it.

A plan has been developed that will hopefully maintain the fragile
peace, eliminate Soviet capability in the region, and to show Venezuela
the power and reach of the US military. Proponents of US air power
within Washington have convinced the President and National Security
Council that by using stealth technology, they cold conduct a covert
strike to destroy the Soviet footprint while getting away undetected and
leave the Venezuelan population none the wiser.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf4\media\image2.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.55417in" alt="F-117 Nighthawk Stealth Fighter Profile" />

----------------

**<u>Caribbean Fury \#4</u>** In this scenario you fill the role of
Commander 49<sup>th</sup> Fighter Wing, US Air Force. With a combination
of F-117 Strike Fighters, a B-2 Stealth Bomber and reconnaissance from
an SR-71 you are to conduct a strike on Manodez Air Base in Venezuela.
In addition to destroying any Soviet aircraft located there, your
targets include communications and command infrastructure being used by
the Soviet ‘advisors’ in Venezuela. You are not to be detected.

<img src="/assets\images\aar\cf\cf4\media\image3.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:3.65764in" alt="SR-71 Blackbird: The Cold War spy plane that&amp;#39;s still the world&amp;#39;s fastest airplane - CNN Style" />
