**Northern Fury – Swift, Silent and Deadly**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Aug 2017</u>**

"A quick scan of the Drop Zone names however, reminds you that on
operations such as these things don’t always go right!"

**Playthrough \#1**

(The scenario actually starts with carrier-based CAP getting tangled up
with Russian ELINT and CAP in the Keflavik area, and the Russians then
moving to engage support aircraft in the carrier group. I restarted,
went into the NATO side, and put the carrier CAP on a tighter leash to
avoid this.)

Initial launch and refueling went well, and the formation moved towards
Iceland in good order. My thought was to pick off support aircraft from
the north, and try and draw off any defending fighters in that direction
and destroy them before the C-130s came in from the west.

On the ground one of the SOF reported BMDs patrolling in the drop zone
area, so the F-18s were tasked to overfly those zones before the drop.
Then the BMD actually spotted the SOF and destroyed them (basic optics
at night, with no thermals, vs carefully hidden infantry – what were the
odds?). Either bad luck, or something going wrong.

A pair of Eagles went in first, staying low then popping up to destroy
both Su-24s. There was no response at first, but then after a couple of
minutes things started erupting all over the place. The Eagles knocked
off a couple of Mig-23s in the NW, and made a nasty discovery. The
Russians have been ordered to push their attacks without evading, and
they don’t turn aside to dodge incoming missiles. This means they’re not
abandoning their own SARH missile shots. No free rides simply by putting
a Sparrow down the bearing any more.

Now the main group of Eagles finds itself facing Flankers and Fulcrums,
with an enemy ground based jammer fuzzing things up between my planes
and their planes. My jammers are there too, but all they’re doing is
preventing the Su-27s from using their Alamo-Cs at long range where I
might be able to dodge them. Now they’re only firing well inside the
no-escape zone! Still, I manage to shoot the enemy down at the cost of
almost all my Sparrows.

The C-130s are down at wavetop height now, and the F-18s fly in to start
working over the drop zones, killing the jammer and clearing the first
two zones. That’s when the Russians surge their fighters, and suddenly
I’m facing fresh Flankers, Fulcrums, and Foxhounds all at very close
range. C-130 vs Mig-31? Hell no. The call goes out to abort.

The C-130s wheel about and flee as best they can. The F-18s try and
dodge the salvo of incoming heavy missiles, nape-of-the-earth and
beaming on afterburner, but all four of them are lost in quick
succession. The F-15s press in using their last few Sparrows, and then
they switch to Sidewinders as they try to cover the retiring C-130s.
Several Eagles are shot down, but they manage to take down the most
dangerous pursuers, and the C-130s flee into the night. None are lost,
and the valuable troops on board survive to fight another day. Meanwhile
the remaining Russian fighters patrol over Reykjavik…

Could I have gotten in? Maybe… I’m pretty sure it would have cost me all
my Eagles to try and take out the fighters. Even one surviving enemy
fighter could take out a few of the C-130s, and I would have been facing
opposition on at least two of the drop zones. If there’d been two more
fresh fighters popping up it would have been enough to make it a
complete massacre. (And it turns out that there were a lot more than 2
available…)

What's this scenario called? Swift, Silent, and Deadly? All right then,
let’s have another go…

**Playthrough \#2**

This time the C-130s come in first at very low level from the north, and
the enemy surveillance planes and ground patrols are left alone. The
F-18s are up north behind the C-130s, and the Eagles are patrolling off
the west coast. There’s been a bit of air-to-air skirmishing in that
area (some with the carrier), but not a lot.

The C-130s get to their drop zones undetected, pop up to 900 feet, and
unload their troops, before diving again and retreating. Some hop over
the ridgeline and head west along the fjord towards the Eagles, one
heads back north along its original route, and some swing south towards
the carrier group.

Now that the troops are on the ground they need protection in their drop
zones, and the F-18s come in low using their night vision pods to find
and attack the Russian patrols. This goes well, and soon two F-18s head
west for the Eagles, and two head south towards the cover of the carrier
group.

The F-18 attacks seem to be what prompts the Russian response, and
swarms of fighters take off shortly after the first bombs hit. The
Eagles immediately engage, but in many cases they are out-ranged (Alamo
Cs, AA-9), and as more enemy take off they soon become outnumbered too.
The Eagles do a fighting retirement to the west, saving the retreating
F-18s, but the C-130s in the area have a problem. Now that the enemy
fighters are up and their radars are on the C-130s are easily visible
(despite my jammers), and they’re not far enough away yet to be safe, or
fast enough to outrun the approaching foe. The Eagles do what they can
with their remaining missiles, but some are shot down nonetheless.

A similar problem faces my retreating F-18s and C-130s in the south.
They had been relying on low-level evasion to escape towards the
carrier, but once the enemy fighters are airborne my planes are
painfully obvious on radar. Carrier-based fighters try and help, but the
fighters pouring out of Keflavik interfere enough that they can’t save
all the C-130s. Ship-based SAMs start engaging too, and that, combined
with an F-14 surge, is just enough to save the F-18s (fleeing on fumes),
which barely make it to the S-3 tanker. (I took manual control of allied
forces in this area.)

The final result in this case is much better. The troops and supplies
are safely on the ground, and local Russian patrols have been destroyed.
A good number of enemy aircraft have been destroyed, including some very
valuable MiG-31s. The Combat Talons took severe losses, but only after
dropping their troops. Overall, the mission is graded a success this
time.

This is a very interesting scenario, requiring stealth and self-control
(ahem) to achieve mission objectives. My usual overt ‘I can take you in
the air’ methods don’t pay off here. If you’re sneaky you can get in.
The real trick is getting out again. If you don’t engage immediately
with the F-18s then you can probably get the C-130s out intact, but then
you run the risk of losing your troops in the drop zones to enemy ground
forces. How long can you afford to wait? Again, this is a really good
scenario for forcing the player to evaluate the situation and make the
proper decisions to ensure success.
