Turkey became a member of NATO in 1952 in conjunction with is geographic
neighbor and long term rival Greece. Turkey is a large country with a
large population and the only NATO country not in Europe proper but in
Asia, except the small area (3% of Turkish land mass) variously called
European Turkey or Eastern Thrace or Turkish Thrace. The Turkish
military is also quite large; the second largest in NATO and it borders
both the Soviet Union and Bulgaria. Turkey also controls the entrance to
the Black Sea through the two important straights, the Bosporus and
Dardanelles, thus limiting the USSR’s ability to influence the
Mediterranean. Strategically then, Turkey is the key to southern Europe
and essential to NATO’s ability to control its southern flank , no doubt
a significant factor in NATO’s meek reaction to the Turkish invasion of
Cyprus in 1974.

Turkey’s relationship with Greece has been a constant source of friction
but it is difficult to say how this would develop under the pressures of
conflict. The multi-national NATO command structure was not built to put
eithers troops, ships or air elements under command of the other. Turkey
retaining command of its land forces as Allied Land Forces South Eastern
Europe (LANDSOUTHEAST) headquartered in Izmir, and reporting directly to
Allied Forces Southern Europe (AFSouth); Sixth Allied Tactical Air Force
(6 ATAF) also in Izmir and Commander North Eastern Mediterranean
(COMEDNOREAST) in Ankara. Greece had equivalent commands all reporting
to Naples.
