**<u>Pacific Fury \#4 â€“ I Come from a Land Down Under</u>**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ June 2021</u>**

Finally had some time to catch up with a sitrep.

**SITUATION**

Well, there's a war on, and its extending into the South China Sea, and
all the way down to Australia. We've been tasked to reinforce the tiny
oil-wealthy state of Brunei with troops delivered by air, and assemble
an assortment of ships in the region to guard its off-shore oil
infrastructure. Unfortunately there's an obstacle-course of unstable
island nations between most of our forces and our objectives, and
rebellious hot-spots are bursting into open flames throughout the
region. Indonesia is guarding its own sovereign territory throughout its
vast archipelago arc, Singapore will share data but has no room for us,
Malaysia is reluctantly granting the most limited of basing (2 planes
only!), and the southern Philippines are a rebellious mess where nobody
wants to deploy aircraft. Meanwhile, Vietnam glowers at us from across
the South China Sea, and although they're not hostile, their masters the
Soviets definitely are. Some of their aircraft are already in the region
at Cam Ranh Bay, and rumour has it that more forces will arrive soon.

We've got a few ships together to form TG Endeavour, heading up through
the Banda Sea to deliver troops to Brunei, and a wide scattering of
ships in ones and twos around southern and western edges of the theatre.
Nowhere do we have more than two warships ships together, and none of
them are truly powerful vessels. Our air /assets are composed of numerous
MPA, primarily P-3s, but they're all spread out around the periphery of
our AO, far from the main zone of concern. We've also got some decent
F-18s, but they're far south in distant Australia, and are required to
stay based at home. At least we have a few tankers for them. Other than
a few Philippine F-5s, and some A-4s which will eventually fly in from
New Zealand, that's about it for combat air power. Last of all, we've
got one O-boat in mid archipelago, and one British SSN, complete with
lamentable British torpedoes, headed north into the South China Sea. If
you look up 'scattered' in the dictionary, we're it...

**THE PLAN**

There's not much of a plan we can make at this point. My various ships
will thread their way through the Indonesian islands, and I will try and
provide P-3 cover for them, to proof their routes in advance. With so
many choke-points to pass through, we are very vulnerable to lurking
subs, who can simply wait in silence, confident we will pass within
range. Hopefully the Russians haven't deployed this far south.

There's almost no chance to form up into strong task groups yet, and in
most cases the ships will have to proceed as they are. I decide to send
HMAS Newcastle (the Australian tail-less Perry) to hurry north and
reinforce TG Endeavour, rather than having her stay back to support the
Westralia. Westralia will head east, to pick up a helicopter from
Darwin, before turning north for her main journey. Black Rover will head
south down the west side of Borneo, to clear the combat zone. HMS
Spartan is ordered north to patrol just off Cam Ranh Bay, to keep a
close watch on any Russian ships lurking there.

Other than that, it'll be the normal procedure for reconnaissance and
patrol, until we can identify the enemy positions and attack.

**FIRST MOVE - RUSSIA vs BRUNEI OIL**

ESM from our scouts rapidly pick up the position of the expected
Nanuchka NNW of Brunei, a patrolling Bear, and some far distant MiG-29
radars, while our own radar picks up a pair of very high altitude
contacts loitering (radar off) over the ocean. Those are presumably
MiG-25s. I send out a Philippine F-5 to try and stalk the Bear if it
gets any closer, but those MiGs mean I won't be able to operate over the
South China Sea, and any MPA in the region will be at risk.

That Nanuchka is a problem, since it has long range missiles and long
range OTH radar, which completely outclass the Exocets on my two
Bruneian missile boats. It can see me first and shoot me first, long
before I could engage it. I order the one at sea to hurry back into
port, where it will hide with the other two until I can deal with the
Nanuchka.

The Russians don't give me time to worry about that, because suddenly
there's a high-velocity high-altitude missile hurtling in from the
north. Nothing I have is remotely capable of intercepting or stopping
it, and it smashes and sinks a tanker in short order. Fortunately, the
Bear-hunting F-5 manages to intercept and kill the Blinder afterwards,
but then four more are spotted. Two head for the airfield at Rimba,
coming in low and fast, but the SHORADS there manage to shoot them down
with a barrage of Mistrals, while the other two head for the Philippine
radar site on Palawan. My second F-5 gets one of them, but the other one
launches a huge missile at the radar site, only to see it malfunction
and go corkscrewing across the sky, wildly out of control. The F-5s
attack that last Blinder with cannon fire, and even though they hit it a
couple of times it manages to make its escape.

The attacks continue. One of the other tankers off Brunei reports that
it's being torpedoed, but my MPA are all far away, and there's nothing I
can do to help. Some MiG-25s come screaming in at 18,000m and 1350
knots, and sprinkle my airbase with iron bombs. They miss so badly it's
a wonder they hit the ground. But then another Blinder shows up, and I
have no fighters to interfere with it. For a moment it looks like it
might be hunting the fleeing Black Rover, but it launches its missile at
another tanker and sinks that instead.

At 15:17, Malaysian MPA relay a spotting report on three incoming ships,
moving towards Brunei at 10 knots, accompanied by the Nanuchka which now
seems to be escorting them. Are they light amphibs of some sort? Maybe a
raid? I've got nothing that can deal with them yet. My missile boats
don't dare approach because of the Nanuchka, my own light aircraft are
leery of the Nanuchka's SAMs, my F-5s are all re-arming for air-to-air
(and they don't want to brave the MiG-25s anyway), and everything else
is occupied elsewhere. Still, the boats are hours away, so I should have
time to send a Harpoon-armed P-3, right?

That's when the Nanuchka starts engaging my oil platforms with its
missiles, which I had not expected, completely destroying at least one
of them before turning for home. It's a painful economic blow, but it
also means my own missile boats are free to attack now that the enemy's
missiles are gone. They come surging out of port at flank speed, and
close on the three advancing ships which turn out to be very large
trawlers. They sink those with a combination of Exocets and cannon fire,
before dashing back to port for reloads. A P-3 does eventually arrive
from Butterworth, and harpoons the retiring Nanuchka, but it is forced
to return home almost immediately for lack of fuel.

It feels like the Russians are solidly in the lead here. I've managed to
kill a few Blinders, a Nanuchka, and three trawlers, but the Russians
have sunk three big tankers and wrecked two oil platforms. Not a great
trade!

**BRUNEI - REBELS ON THE GROUND**

There's plenty happening on the ground too. Battlefield scout
helicopters are sent out from the airfield in Brunei, and they almost
immediately draw SAM fire from MANPADS in the south edge of the little
country. Fortunately, these are old SA-7s, and the gunners are firing at
long range, so the odds of a hit are quite low. Several of them are
spotted this way, including one in Malaysia itself, and ground troops
close in and kill most of them using a combination of mortar fire and
direct fire from the Scorpion recce tanks.

There doesn't seem to be a lot of rebel activity near the Bruneian
troops, but a lot more start showing up near the British forces in the
west. These seem to be mostly technicals, armed with heavy automatic
weapons, and they're actually quite dangerous to any plain infantry
units. They start moving east, towards the Shell installations there,
but the Ghurkas manage to whittle them down, with a combination of
mortar fire, helicopter attacks (AS-11s proving to have dismal
accuracy), rocketing from the little SF 260 attack planes (also dismal),
nicely accurate Milans, and finally a few Scorpions. (Maybe my missile
boats should have helped too, but they were busily hiding from the
Nanuchka at this point.)

The first of several troop reinforcements starts late in the day, with
Australian forces arriving by 707. More will arrive in the next few
hours, so the situation seems stable here for the moment.

**FIRST EVENING**

As the fighting in Brunei goes into an evening lull, my ships continue
to advance through the archipelago. The Westralia has picked up a
helicopter flown in from Darwin by now, and has turned north, but this
diversion eastward has put her well behind schedule, and I have to admit
the decision was a mistake. It looks like she'll be a few hours too
late, even if she steams at flank speed. (Lesson - measure routes and
distances before committing!)

Things seem calm most other places, as P-3s try and proof lanes in front
of advancing ships. Some P-3s have deployed to Christmas Island, and
most of the others are moving up to Darwin, but even so the long ranges
are a problem. This is particularly true for the distant TG Endeavour,
where my P-3s have shorter and shorter times on station. Sonobuoy
coverage in front of those ships is spotty at best. My SS, the Onslow is
doing what it can to keep ahead of the TG, snorkelling frequently, and
pausing to listen, but she won't be able to maintain her position for
much longer.

The most excitement is in the centre of the Sulu Strait, where the
patrol boat Pangasinan suddenly notices that the civilian traffic among
the islands there includes a number of fast movers, which are suddenly
closing at an alarming 38 knots! The captain turns to put them on the
starboard aft quarter, just within the arc of his main gun, and
accelerates to a mighty 15 knot flank speed, trying to reduce the
closure rate. All glasses are pointed at the approaching boats, and when
the first one gets within two miles he orders his gunners to fire. The
Boghammers are fast, but very fragile, and a few hits are enough to slow
them down. The Pangasinan manages to tackle them one at a time, keeping
out of their gun range, and then circles around to shoot up the armed
dhows which are following more slowly in their wake. The engagement goes
well, and the Pangasinan continues to patrol, eventually finding a
second pack of Boghammers shortly after midnight. That engagement turns
out to be rather riskier, since it almost runs my ship out of
ammunition, and the crew retire to the Philippine naval base at Rio
Hondo to reload and patch a few bullet holes.

**POLITICS AND INTELLIGENCE**

Politics never sleeps, and I soon get an interesting political choice to
make. Would I like access to Indonesian airspace, removing those
geographical barriers which are keeping my P-3s from reaching their
patrol zones? All I have to do is bomb the East Timorese! And eat a
heaping plateful of hypocrisy, of course... After all, our government
has been trying to protect them from persecution for some time now. I'm
given an hour to reflect and decide. While it would be very helpful to
have access, I think we can scrape by without it. I tell HQ that we will
try to manage without the Indonesian help.

The news from Intel is much less controversial. They've got confirmation
that a major Soviet convoy, P-9417, is headed for Cam Ranh Bay. It's
coming through between Taiwan and Luzon, and should reach its
destination in 2 to 3 days. Clearly, we'd like to interfere with this,
but it's a long way from our strike /assets. HMS Spartan is ordered to
accelerate its progress towards Cam Ranh Bay, and take up a patrol
station 30 miles off-shore in the anticipated direction of the convoy.
That will help, but pinning our hopes on one sub is much too risky a
gamble. Far better to hit them some other way. The P-3 guys keep
muttering to each other, and measuring the map. They're up to something,
I can tell, but so far they won't say exactly what.

**INTO THE NIGHT**

Enemy air-power is still active in the night. Singaporean patrol planes
report numerous ESM contacts from large formations of Vietnamese
MiG-21s, at one point counting 24 of them active at one time! They seem
to come and go, and we come to the conclusion that this is some sort of
intermittent CAP. At first it seems absurd to have so many up, but on
reflection I really don't want to push into a swarm like that, even with
superior aircraft. Quantity has a quality of its own...

The loitering Bear eventually goes away shortly after dark, but another
one shows up, along with fresh MiGs around 22:00 hrs. An F-5 goes up to
loiter, in case the Bear comes south, but it seems to be staying north
now. Instead, a May comes sniffing around, so the F-5 obligingly shoots
it down instead. The Bear's turn comes later, when another F-5 gets it
by swinging around from the north, nervously eyeing the MiG-29s and 25s
for signs of hostile action.

The enemy fighters seem to be quiescent, so one of my P-3s from
Butterworth takes advantage of the darkness to make a discrete radar-off
hunt for the sub (subs?) which was operating near Brunei. The sonobuoys
turn up one false target, but nothing else. Maybe the sub has gone home
for reloads? In any case, the P-3 soon has to leave for fuel, and the
crew is happy to go. Those MiG-25s have the potential to dash in and
snap up a P-3 before there is any hope of escape, if they decide to
leave their station.

Another pair of P-3s arrives from Guam, flying pure reconnaissance
missions. They fly across the northern Philippines, and press on towards
the west, hunting for the convoy, and at first there's no sign of it.
The southern plane gets so far west that it picks up a sniff of a couple
of 2-ship Vietnamese patrol groups operating off Phu Cat. They seem to
be sub hunter groups, and they're not an immediate concern. The other
plane finds the convoy further north than I had expected, and cheerfully
radios its position back to base. Then, having waved their radars around
long enough, they go radio silent and return to Guam.

Administrative moves are continuing too. More airliners are trickling in
to Brunei, and dropping off troops as quickly as they can, before
refuelling and heading back to Darwin. (Nobody wants to linger here, fat
and helpless in the war zone.) The A-4s arrive from New Zealand,
demanding to be armed immediately, only to be told that the C-130 full
of munitions won't be here for at least half a day. The pilots express
their frank displeasure at this boneheaded move. I should have kept the
A-4s securely at home and timed them to arrive along with the C-130. The
F-18s are on the move too, having hopped up to Darwin to give them a
little more range in the coming day. With any luck, we can soon try and
regain some of the initiative.

So, after a disk error wipes out part 2 of the AAR and all my notes, let
the rewrite begin...

**QUIET DAY**

After the excitement of the Russian's opening salvoes, the next day is
somewhat quieter, with assorted patrolling and advances. The rebels seem
to be quiet in Brunei for the moment, and the Herc finally arrives there
with the munitions for the A-4s, so they load up with an multipurpose
assortment of ordnance (bombs, Mavericks, and Sidewinders). My ships
keep cruising along, with the Newcastle catching up to TG Endeavour
shortly before rounding the corner of North Sulawesi and heading NW. The
SS Onslow has been preceding the TG, looking for subs, but she can't
keep ahead of the formation any more, so she's assigned to keep
patrolling here.

Intel lets us know about a suspicious LPG carrier, somewhere out west of
Australia. A couple of F-18s go out for a look, and find it much closer
than expected. They buzz it, and all seems normal. One of our
coast-guard patrol boats is ordered out to meet the tanker, and will
probably report in sometime in the evening.

The most activity is in the air, where two flights of F-18s get dragged
north on a pair of tankers, hoping to catch the MiG-25s which keep
pressurizing me over the South China Sea. Of course, when we get there
the skies, which were full of signals from Bears and Flankers and MiGs,
are completely empty! The planes press on much further NW than intended,
and finally meet and kill a pair of MiG-29s, as well as an unexpected
tanker, but it's a risky operation and they end up running away from
packs of MiG-21s which come to investigate. They end up dumping unused
missiles to increase fuel efficiency, then pick up the last dregs of gas
from the two tankers, before finally meeting the third one half-way home
with great relief. Overall, a bit risky, and not necessarily worth the
effort.

The F-5s show how to do it more efficiently. We've taken to
advance-basing one in Brunei, and it manages to pop out and whack an
incautious Bear that comes too far south. Fortunately, the MiG-25s
either don't spot us, or choose to ignore us, and the F-5 gets away.
Another airplane from Brunei takes a moment to buzz one of the merchant
ship contacts that weâ€™ve been watching intermittently out by Swallow
Reef. It turns out to be a Vietnamese frigate, not a merchant at all,
and itâ€™s presumably feeding the Soviets all sorts of spotting reports.
But weâ€™re not at war, so our forces (reluctantly) leave it alone.

**OPERATION DOLITTLE**

Shortly after noon we get more Intel on that Russian convoy, P-9417. It
contains multiple large merchants, and a big RORO, packed to the gills
with all manner of Soviet military nastiness. HMS Spartan is on station
off Cam Ranh Bay, waiting to ambush it, but relying on one sub to stop
the convoy is not a sound strategy. Iâ€™d definitely like to hit the
convoy much earlier and further away than that. The trouble is, that it
is so far away that our strike /assets canâ€™t reach it in effective
numbers.

Thatâ€™s when the grinning P-3 guys put a folder on my desk labelled
â€˜Operation Dolittleâ€™. The routes are reviewed, the figures are
double-checked, and it all works out. The majority of the P-3s are
ordered to finish their patrols, return to base, load Harpoons, and get
some rest. They will have a busy night. (Naysayers point out that this
will leave us very low on ASW /assets in the meantime, but the potential
payoff is very high. The operation will proceed.)

**REDACTED -------Spoilers in this next section, if you have not played
you should skip this bit**

*As dusk falls, the Patrol Boat Geelong is approaching the LPG tanker
Berget Danuto. The ship has been cruising towards Darwin at a steady 18
knots all day, but now itâ€™s nearly come to a stop, and the crew seems to
have left in several small speedboats. As the watchkeeper looks on
through his glasses, several plumes of white vapour erupt from the decks
of the ship, coiling around it in a spreading cloud that obscures the
vessel. The young sailor only has a moment to look to his officer with a
puzzled expression, before the tanker vanishes in a cataclysmic flash
that destroys it and everything around it.*

*Seismic stations in multiple nations record the effects of the blast,
and WMD experts are quick to point out the catastrophic consequences if
this had occurred in port. An immediate media blackout is clamped down
over the event to prevent public hysteria and panic about further acts
of sabotage. Dissemination of this information is on a need-to-know
basis only.*

**REDACTED ----OK to resume reading**

**GO FOR DOLITTLE**

At 8:00 PM we get another Intel update on the convoy. HQ needs it
destroyed before it gets to Vietnam, and theyâ€™re so serious about it
that theyâ€™ve given us B-52s and tankers at Guam, and F-111s and RF-111s
at Amberley, in order to do it. The trouble is, the first P-3s from
Christmas Island are already lifting off to attack!

What the P-3 guys had pointed out was that if you take a P-3, load up 4
Harpoons, and throw out all the other useless stuff â€“ the 8 torpedoes,
140 sonobuoys, racks of sonar equipment, the ASW operators, and even
their chairs and snacks â€“ you can get quite an impressive boost in fuel
efficiency and range. Itâ€™s enough to fly up to the northern end of the
Philippines and even get home again. Our first strike wave is composed
of 8 P-3s at Darwin, 2 at Christmas Island, 2 at Butterworth, and 2 in
Guam, plus two F-18s and their tankers, all lined up and ready to go for
a time-on target of roughly 3:00 AM. Three more P-3s wonâ€™t be ready on
time, so theyâ€™re scheduled to form a second wave three hours later.

The planners had considered delaying the attack for just one late wave,
but the benefits of an attack in total darkness, delaying visual
detection of incoming missiles, was judged superior to three extra
planes in a dawn attack. Now, the B-52s can be added to the second wave,
and their crews are hastily briefed on the ongoing operation. The
F-111s, unfortunately, are too far away to participate in time.
Operation Dolittle will proceed as ordered, and the first P-3s get
underway on their six-and-a-half-hour journey to the target.

(Getting the partial loadouts requires a bit of editor work. Launch the
plane, subtract the torpedoes and sonobuoys from the weapons screen, and
then open the magazines in the base and add them back in there, to keep
the accounting straight. A bit clumsy, but it works.)

**RESCUE**

At 8:30 weâ€™re contacted by officials of the government of Papua New
Guinea, requesting our assistance. Apparently, a small passenger plane
has gone down in the mountains, and theyâ€™d like our assistance finding
it. Why they think weâ€™re in the rescue business, I couldnâ€™t say, but we
need to keep our allies happy, I guess. I only have three P-3s left in
theatre, and the closest two of those are 1500 miles away to the south,
transiting from New-Zealand to Darwin. One of them is diverted north to
join the search, and one of our RF-111s is also sent to look for the
downed fliers.

They participate in the hunt for the next couple of days, but nothing
ever turns up. The jungle has swallowed the small plane tracelessly.
(Some commentators wonder whether the plane suffered mechanical failure,
or whether there was some sort of rebel activity which shot it down. So
far we donâ€™t know.)

**DISASTER**

It had to happen.

At 2:11 AM on the 16th, the captain of HMAS Westralia makes a sudden
Mayday call. His vessel has been struck by a missile, and more are
coming in. He makes a desperate attempt to alter course, but the action
is futile, and more missiles hit, turning the Westralia into a flaming
wreck and sinking her within minutes.

Westralia, full of vital supplies for the American carrier groups, had
been transiting the narrow strait between Seram and Buru Islands alone.
Its â€˜escortâ€™, the Newcastle, had long since dashed ahead to join TG
Endeavour, when the Westralia diverted to pick up a helicopter from
Darwin at the start of the operation. The finger pointing starts the
moment the news reaches base. Why donâ€™t they have P-3 cover? (Theyâ€™re
all off to attack the convoy, right?) Why wasnâ€™t the strait swept in
advance? (It had been, by TG Endeavour and P-3s when it passed through â€“
but the day before.) Thereâ€™s plenty of time to play the blame gameâ€¦ (It
was a reckless decision of mine to send the Westralia out alone,
trusting that what was safe yesterday was safe today. Bad idea, and a
mistake which keeps biting me in multiple scenarios. Even more
heartbreaking was that before I changed my mind and decided to divert
for the helicopter, I had it going through a different strait, which
would have avoided the issue!)

We know the missiles didnâ€™t come from a surface ship (passing P-3s have
seen nothing on radar), and the possibility of a shore-based launcher is
remote, so that means a submarine. I had expected SSs or SSKs in this
region, but this is probably an SSGN, either a Charlie or maybe an Echo.
My other ships have been travelling radar-off, but if there are SSGNs
down here I canâ€™t do that any more. Each group of ships is ordered to
turn on at least one air-search radar. So much for stealth, but stealth
doesnâ€™t help if youâ€™re dead.

The other question is how the Westralia was spotted. It could easily
have been the sub itself, but the possibility of shore-based spotters
canâ€™t be ruled out. After all, this happened in the very narrowest part
of the strait. Some observers even wonder if the Indonesians are
complicit in this, trying to exert pressure on our forces to join their
push against the East Timorese.

**RETRIBUTION**

Itâ€™s near 3:00 AM, in the dead dark of early morning, when our P-3s
converge on the location of Convoy PQ-9417. The Philippine F.27-200MAR
has been tracking the convoy from a safe distance, using its powerful
radar, and it vectors the P-3s and F-18s in to strike the convoy from
the south-east, in its left flank.

There are 11 ships, in a 13-mile-long formation, but their radars are
off, and we have no idea which ship is which. Our 14 P-3s and 2 F-18s
have 60 missiles between them, and they unleash them in a broad salvo
along the entire length of the convoy. The P-3s turn and leave as the
missiles drop away to cruise quietly through the night. The enemy
doesnâ€™t react until the missile heads turn on, and then the entire fleet
lights up, but by then its much too late. The F-18s can see dull distant
flashes of light through the clouds, and the loitering F.27 starts
losing contacts from the back of the formation. The missiles are getting
through.

By the time ten or fifteen minutes have passed, the radar operators
report that they only have two contacts left on radar, conditionally
identified as a pair of cruisers, and theyâ€™ve slowed to approximately 6
knots. The F-18s, who have been refuelling, duck below the clouds and
report a distant orange point of light in the direction of the convoy.
Someone is burning.

The P-3s of the second wave are ordered to turn back now, and take their
missile home with them. They will resume ASW patrols as soon as they can
rest their crews and reload. Meanwhile, the B-52s will continue to
advance, and they duly arrive at dawn, and finish off the remaining two
cruisers without undue difficulty. HMS Spartan, loitering patiently off
Cam Ranh Bay, is going to have a very long wait indeed.

**THE AIR OFF BRUNEI**

Once the F-18s have refuelled they arenâ€™t ordered directly home.
Instead, theyâ€™re sent to the South China Sea, where they attempt to
pounce on the MiG-25s from an unexpected direction, but once again all
the planes vanish as I arrive. Itâ€™s infuriating! Fortunately, this time
a second pair shows up, and my pilots manage to shoot both of them down,
and another tanker. Interestingly, a glimpse of the MiGs shows theyâ€™re
not fighters. Theyâ€™re the Wild Weasel version instead, and all this time
Iâ€™ve been tiptoeing around in fear of planes which would not have been
able to harm me.

Abruptly, radar operators on the ground in Brunei start calling out
Vampire contacts, and my heart sinks. Has another Blinder flown in to
sink another tanker? Or is an SSGN about to start destroying my oil
platforms? Iâ€™ve already taken plenty of damage to the oil
infrastructure, and any more could decisively limit our war objectives.
Instead, as the contact courses are refined, it looks like the missiles
are headed for my Bruneian airbase instead.

The ready F-5 is scrambled immediately, then the A-4s, and anything else
which can fly, just to get them off the ground before the missiles can
hit. Fortunately, there donâ€™t seem to be too many of them, and the
fighters manage to get them all. However, the F-18s report radar
contacts on more missiles further out to sea, and itâ€™s becoming apparent
that weâ€™re under attack by the SLCMs of a Yankee Notch. Itâ€™s probably
somewhere off the coast of Vietnam, which means we donâ€™t have a hope of
finding it. The one saving grace is that the distances are so large, and
the reload rate on a Yankee Notch is so slow, that we have time to fly
in more F-5s from the Philippines. Between Sidewinders, cannon, fire,
and the F-18s acting as off-shore radar pickets, my forces manage to
intercept all the missiles, and keep both airbases safe.

Except, of course, thereâ€™s always a leaker or two, and we gradually get
reports of a blast at the Shell Oil facility between the bases. The
buildings are furiously aflame, and despite their best efforts the local
fire-fighting units are unable to stop the conflagration. The facility
burns for a day, choking the air with black smoke, until it is
completely destroyed.

**TAKING STOCK**

The destruction of the convoy is excellent news, of course, but itâ€™s
almost entirely offset by the loss of the Westralia, and further damage
to the oil infrastructure in Brunei. Our forces are definitely pulling
ahead, and the sinking of those cruisers will give us more freedom to
operate in the theatre, but the lack of supply will definitely slow down
the pace of upcoming carrier operations.

The next task is to get our remaining supply ships safely to their
destinations, and we canâ€™t afford any more screwups. All it would take
is one undetected sub (or, God help us, a minefield) to completely wreck
the pace of future operations.

**HOMEWARD BOUND**

The next day (Feb 17) dawns with the P-3s droning steadily homeward,
with light planes and light hearts, but heavy eyelids. For some of the
crews, their voyage will be nearly 15 hours long. All of them make it
home unmolested, and the last of them land at Darwin around 10:30 in the
morning. Some of the crews draw the long straw, and get to rest, but for
many of them thereâ€™s no such luck. Four short hours later theyâ€™re
re-armed with ASW loadouts and heading out again to hunt for submarines.

**A DAY OF SCATTERED FIGHTING**

One development is that the returning F-18s spot what seems to be a
suspicious port facility of some sort on Tawitawi Island. This is the
region where all those Boghammers were operating, so the information is
sent back to HQ, and a strike of F-18s with heavy LGBs is sent out to
attack the port. The facilities seem to be empty when the pilots arrive,
and the facilities are so dispersed and primitive that the bombs do
little significant damage. Still, thereâ€™s plenty of smoke and noise, so
honour is satisfied.

The F-18s split up after the attack, and use their FLIR pods to do a
recce through the islands in the region, and they find another pack of
Boghammers loitering in the east of the Sulu Strait. The Pangasinan has
reloaded by now, and she leaves Rio Hondo and hurries to the area, where
she guns down most of the Boghammers (some moving an impressive 50
knots) around mid-day. A few of the dhows move off to the south-west,
which makes me wonder if theyâ€™re somehow trying to intercept TG
Endeavour, which is approaching the area. After a long stern chase, the
Pangasinan catches them in the late afternoon and destroys them, before
moving off to police the last few drifting hulks which havenâ€™t quite
sunk yet.

Other F-18s head north, making use of the American tankers from Guam,
and do sweeps and patrols throughout the region. They manage to get two
more MiG-25s over the South China Sea, but the Russians are largely
keeping to themselves for the moment. They also spot an AGI in the same
area, shortly before dusk, and strafe it until it comes to a halt. A-4s
find it the next morning, and finish it off with a brace of 500lb bombs.

The best news of the day comes at 14:40 hours, when a P-3 on a dedicated
search mission reports a goblin contact in the area where the Westralia
was sunk. Passive sonobuoys confirm the contact as a Charlie class SSGN,
and it is soon sent to the bottom by a brace of torpedoes.

**INTO THE NIGHT**

My ships continue to push north through the warm waters towards their
objectives. TG Endeavour and TG Green Rover meet and combine into one
task group just south of the Sulu Strait, and then commence their
passage using the western-most channel. After the Westralia fiasco Iâ€™m
very concerned about subs in these choke-point areas, and P-3s struggle
to maintain sonobuoy coverage ahead of my ships. The distances are so
great now that they need to resort to partial torpedo loadouts, only
carrying four or even two of their eight torpedoes, in order to extend
their range. Some of the P-3s are sent in on Maritime Surveillance
loadouts, without any ordnance at all, just so they can continue to
monitor sonobuoys dropped by other aircraft.

My submarine paranoia kicks up a notch shortly after 10:00 PM, when the
SS Onslow, which had been left behind to patrol the shipping lane around
North Sulawesi, detects a moving contact 5 miles to her east. As the
contact firms up the Onslow fires a single Mk 48, which catches and
kills a loitering Tango. The Soviets are definitely guarding the
chokepoints, and there are sure to be more of them around.

My fighter pilots have a little more exercise overnight, when a May
shows up where the F-5s can get at it, and the F-18s manage to come to
grips with two more MiG-29s, but there are no organized attacks against
Brunei. Are they holding fire for the arrival of my ships?

**ARRIVAL DAY**

February 18th sees the continuation of long-range P-3 patrols, in front
of advancing task groups and in the general area north of Brunei.

TG Endeavour rounds the north tip of Borneo at 16:00 hours, using the
narrow passage closest to the coast. Transit lanes have been proofed by
multiple passages of Bruneian missile boats, sonobuoys are in place,
P-3s are loitering, helicopters are up, radar is on, and F-18s are on
CAP. Lookouts tensely scan the seas in all directions, and sonar
operators hunch over their scopes. Nothing happens, and the task group
turns south-west, on the home stretch for Brunei.

First arrivals in Brunei actually come from the west, when the Chatham
and Hall escort the Black Rover into rendezvous zone at 9:45 PM. My
fears about some sort of local observer are stoked an hour later, when a
fast-moving sub is detected coming towards my ships through the sonobuoy
field to the north. The attending P-3 hurries over to the target, and
identifies it, to everyoneâ€™s astonishment, as the Yankee Notch! Itâ€™s
certainly an unorthodox move, to send a cruise missile carrier against
ships, but its torpedoes are no less deadly. The P-3 drops two torpedoes
on the Yankee, and they both hit, but the tough old Yankee refuses to
sink, which is a problem. The P-3 only had two torpedoes, because of its
light extended-range loadout. Now itâ€™s forced to watch as the Hall sends
over a helicopter to finish the job and steal the kill.

Most of the Darwin P-3s are being taken off patrol at this point, and
given a chance to stand down. A few are engaged in local patrols in
choke-points through the southern end of the Indonesian archipelago, but
most are finally being given a chance for maintenance and rest after the
extremely long flight hours in the last few days. No such luck for the
three P-3s cycling through Butterworth, who have to keep patrolling off
Brunei for the foreseeable future.

**FINAL DAY**

The last day sees more P-3 and F-18 patrolling, with some fighter sweeps
coming within 150 miles of Cam Ranh Bay. No Soviets show up, just clouds
of Vietnamese MiG-21s, which the F-18s prudently avoid. Our fighters do
finally manage to provoke another engagement with the MiG-29s, bringing
our total score up to 6, but that is the last of the air-to air
activity.

TG Endeavour reaches Brunei with 7 hours left to go, and starts sending
some ships to refuel (the Perrys are thirsty) while others remain on
guard across the mouth of the bay. P-3 patrols continue, but no further
subs are detected, and the bulk of our supplies (minus the lamented
Westralia) seem to be secure for the arrival of the American carrier
group in the days to come.
