**Mediterranean Fury \#1 – The Road to Byzantium**

**<u>Playtest Report by AndrewJ Feb 2019</u>**

After a few minutes of play here and there I finally have enough done to
report the first day's activities...

SITUATION

It's the afternoon of Feb 13 1994, and Soviet high command has given
orders to seize the Bosporus in the next 48 hours. I have several groups
of amphibious transports underway near the Crimea, numerous missile and
torpedo boats screening the formation, and a small but reasonably potent
surface group (based around a Slava) which is meaner than anything that
NATO has in the area. I also have several submarines (some quite old,
and none nuclear) in the area, patrolling and screening, and readying to
lay mines on either side of the Bosporus. My air fleet is quite large,
with numerous middle-aged fighters and attack planes, a lesser quantity
of modern aircraft, a formidable heavy bomber force (mostly set up for
level bombing), and a large transport group ready to make a paradrops. I
also have a large number of shore-based SSMs in the Crimea, which can
reach all the way across the Black Sea, and a useful SAM belt in
Bulgaria which includes SA-5s that reach well into Greece.

I’m faced by a large number of NATO fighter aircraft, mostly Greek and
Turk, but with the possibility of American activity from bases in the
south of Turkey. Many of their aircraft (F-16s, F-5s) only have short
range missiles, and I hope that this will give my Flagons and Mig-23s a
chance to engage at a distance, before the superior NATO agility can
come into play. I’m not expecting major strikes (at least initially) by
NATO aircraft, though that may come later. The Turkish surface navy’s
larger units are not a real concern, since I have significant sensor and
missile overmatch, and I expect to be able to take care of them with
little difficulty. Their smaller missile boats may be a problem, if they
get loose in a pack at the wrong moment, but if I’m given time to engage
them I expect they won’t survive very long either. Their subs could be a
real problem if they happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time,
but so far reports are that many of them are still in base, and the slow
transit speed of conventional subs means they may not be able to get in
the way in time.

Reports are that political operatives are fomenting a coup in Turkey,
which may cause confusion and delay to work in our favour. While I am
somewhat sceptical of the coup’s chances (I took choice 1, 100 pts for
minor interference), I have asked the political operatives to do what
they can to interfere with the Turkish sub force.

**PLAN**

The main amphibious forces will tighten up into closer formation and
proceed at a slow 12 kt cruise towards the Bosporus, screened by sub
chasers and escorts using active sonar, and covered by MPA which will
lay a sonobuoy corridor in their path. (I really wish I had some
Udaloys, since my sonar is quite weak, but this will have to do.) The
SAG will slow to wait for the amphibs to catch up, so it can provide SAM
cover, and the missile boats will screen without getting too far ahead.
I want to keep them out of range of Turkish missiles for the moment,
until I can knock down radars and give my boats freedom to operate
without being observed. Hovercraft units wait off the Romanian coast,
and the small frigates and patrol boats in the area move to screen them.
Their oiler proceeds south towards Bulgaria with an escort, to be ready
closer to the beaches when the hovercraft return.

Submarine minelaying will proceed at both ends of the Bosporus, and
air-dropped mines will be emplaced at the N end of the strait, and in
front of the Turkish sub base on the Black Sea.

Air operations will be initiated by recce flybys before active
hostilities commence. Heavy bombers are tasked to make missile attacks
on the two F-16 bases south of Constantinople, and ARM attacks on air
search radars in northern Turkey and Greece. They will also make heavy
conventional attacks on the third F-16 base at Murted, coastal
fortifications and troop concentrations near the Bosporus, and the
submarine base at Bartin. Attack planes from the USSR will support these
efforts, concentrating mostly on the Bosporus area, as well as the
airbase attack at Murted, and heavy fighter sweeps will cover activities
throughout the area of operation. (Bulgarian attack planes are not ready
today and will only be able to add their firepower to the attacks on Feb
14.)

Attack operations will cease after darkness, as aircraft return to base
and ready for strikes at dawn on Feb 14. (Although the sim will let me
make attacks during the night, in reality my strike aircraft have no
useful night vision, and would be ineffective after dark. Therefore I
will only be making attacks during daylight hours.) Fighter patrols will
continue as needed throughout the night, although I hope to limit the
activity to give the crews some rest where possible.

Landings could proceed on Feb 14, although it may be advisable to delay
them until Feb 15, depending on the amount of opposition in the area. My
main risk here is that the longer I wait, the more forces the Turks can
organise and bring to the region, and the more chances they have to
recover from the coup. Of course, if I go in immediately, I may not be
able to provide effective support in the face of opposition which is not
adequately reduced. This decision will have to be made in light of recce
reports after the morning strikes on Feb 14.

**FEB 13 – First afternoon**

Operations begin with mine-carrying Backfires making afterburner dashes
to try and reach their target areas before overt hostilities commence,
and they make it to the north end of the Bosporus and begin their work
without interference, although the Turks must be well aware that
something’s going on. The pair of planes assigned to mine the sub base
at Bartin have difficulty hitting the tiny target zone. (The sea-floor
slopes down so sharply here that the mines, which only work down to 45m
depth, have a miniscule area in which they will function.) When it’s
clear that they’re not laying an effective pattern, the bombers turn and
beat it for home, before the Turks can respond, leaving the base open
for operation. Meanwhile, the two Kilos which have been assigned to mine
either end of the strait rush at full speed to the shallows, and
commence mine-laying there too. This takes longer to accomplish, but
their mines work in deeper water, so they can work further out than the
Backfires did. Unfortunately, they can’t get into the shallows near the
shore (without surfacing), so there are gaps there which patrol boats
could easily slip through.

A recce Mig-21 from Bulgaria makes it to the Bosporus coast minutes
before hostilities, and flies along offshore getting a useful look at
the troops which are already deployed in the area, and it’s clear that
there are already a lot of them. Some of them are SAM units too, which
will have to be taken care of before ground-attack planes can descend to
useful levels. Airborne radar from ship and shore-based helicopters and
flying boats also reveals a few merchant ships and Turkish surface
combatants already at sea, but these are in range of shore-based
Shaddocks, so….

**At 13:00 Zulu hostilities commence!**

Keys are turned in Shaddock launch bunkers, and missiles are away. The
patrol boats east of the Bosporus die with little fanfare. The destroyer
to the west neatly destroys the flight of 4 that were sent his way. The
bunker commander frowns, reads his copy of Janes, and notes that the
destroyer only has an 8-cell SAM launcher, which he is presumably using
two per incoming missile. Very well, this time it will be a salvo of 6!
Four to use up the SAMs, and two for the destroyer. As predicted the
SAMs knock down 4 missiles, but the next two get shot down as well. The
bunker commander grinds his teeth, reads further into Janes, and notes
the extensive fit of multiple CIWS. This time it’s a salvo of 8, and
this time the brave destroyer is finally overwhelmed. Eighteen missiles
for a destroyer. The Committee for Internal Budgetary Expenditure Review
will not be pleased…

Air launched missile attacks (made from the safety of Romanian airspace)
on the two F-16 bases south of Constantinople go well, and the Turks
have nothing ready to oppose the incoming shots. All the runways and
taxiways are cratered, and the bases should be out of operation for a
couple of days. ARM attacks also go well, and many of the forward search
radars go down, which may give some cover for our operations.
Unfortunately, airborne ELINT /assets are reporting the distinct signal
of AWACS units deep in the enemy’s rear, so they still have effective
radar cover over their own territory.

Air-to-air fighting begins ahead of my incoming attackers. I had hoped
the Flagons would be useful against F-16s and F-5s due to the range
advantage of their missiles, but the difference is minor, the chance of
hitting the agile F-16s is minimal, and by the time the missile gets
there the F-16s are usually in range anyways. They kill a few, but the
exchange is poor, so I pull them back to screen. The Mig-23s do better,
but I have to be careful not to press into short range missile range
after the AA-7s are gone (especially if using AA-8s), and of course the
Mig-25s and Mig-29s have plenty of range advantage for their initial
shots. As expected, then, the few NATO planes that are up to begin with
are dealt with reasonably quickly.

This leaves the window open for four aging Blinders, each toting a
single massive bomb, to make a low-level attack on the sub-pens at the
Bartin Naval Base. During planning I didn’t expect decisive results
against the tough target, but after the failure of the minelaying
attempt this has taken on new importance. As the bombs burst the crews
are astonished to see the entire cliff-face collapse over the tunnel
entrance to the pen, trapping (and maybe crushing) all the subs inside.
(Miss distance: 4m!) The Turkish AAA gunners open up with a furious
barrage, but the tough old Blinders are made of cast iron and
horse-shoes, and although chunks get knocked off they keep flying, and
all of them make it home again. This stroke of luck is a huge relief, as
the subs are what concerned me the most of all of Turkey’s forces.

The next attack to go in is actually composed of Mig-23s from Krasnodar,
attacking the F-5 base at Merzifon. The first flights go in at very low
level, but get savaged by Rapiers, so the following flights pull up
steeply and dump their bombs all over the airfield from above Rapier
altitude. The results are not impressive, although the escorts do make a
good score against the F-5s that come up to fight. The main benefit is
that command issues a new directive – no further low-level attacks
against defended airfields! The SAMs and flack are just too intense.

This information comes in time to modify the attack on the F-16 base at
Murted. Attack planes with AS-14s manage to destroy the Rapiers from
altitude, and the first heavy bomber run manages to lay a good stick of
bombs across one of the runways. Then my raid director (in one of the
Blinders, which have recce cameras) makes a mistake, and decides to
postpone the rest of the strike to allow attack planes to try and deal
with some of the AAA. This would help the bombers, allowing them to get
lower, but while I’m spending time screwing around it also gives time to
the Turks, who start surging F-16s from their shelters. That results in
a dangerous situation as my attack planes and bombers scatter to get
clear, and my escorts struggle to contain the defenders. The escorts
eventually regain control of the air, and the bombers return to close
the other runway and taxiway, but it’s a good lesson in not wasting
time.

Over at the Bosporus, the first portion of the attack is lead by two
flights of Fitters, coming in low to eliminate the two Nike sites using
AS-14s. (They pick off a couple of missile boats coming out of Golcuk
naval base too.) With those obstacles gone, the main attack focuses on
the fortifications and troops at the north end of the strait. Su-24s use
their big PGMs on the fortifications, attack planes try and deal with
the SAMs and the better AAA using AS-14s from altitude, and the heavy
bombers drop sticks of bombs across the major troop concentrations and
fortifications. It’s not a well organised attack, and at the end of it
some of the main forts still survive in damaged condition, the ground
forces are battered, but not entirely eliminated, and the small coastal
outposts are almost entirely intact. I think we have killed most of the
medium SAMs and 35mm AAA (and sank the destroyer lurking near the south
end of the strait), but any defences at the south end are entirely
untouched. Recce flights have also detected some armour concentrations
in the valley to the east of Golcuk, and those will have to be dealt
with too. Clearly a lot of work remains to be done, which makes me think
that landing tomorrow morning may not be wise.

As all this activity is ongoing, and the Turkish air-force has been
mostly dispersed, the Mig-25s take the opportunity to make a special
attack. Two flights of lightly laden Foxbats, carrying only two big
missiles, some Aphids, and external tanks, make a deep penetration
flight, heading due south towards the American presence which is
presumably around Incirlik. Crossing the coast, they light their burners
and dash south at top speed, blowing past some F-4s and heading straight
for the AWACS. They manage to destroy it and a tanker before the
defences can react, and they turn back north. They don’t have the fuel
to dash home, and the F-4s are closing in, but they manage to just
scrape by, using their reserves for outrunning Sparrows, before landing
at the closest available airport (Belbek) on fumes.

In the meantime, one of the Turkish subs surfaces near our fleet and
announces that it is neutral and retreating from battle! I guess the
political guys really do have their act together after all… I have to
hastily mark it neutral, after I notice my Be-12s all converging on it
with hostile intent. I consider sinking it, but for the moment I will
monitor it and let it go. Since I was very close to ruining a convoy
right in front of it, it’s a good thing they surrendered.

My own subs are getting some activity too. My Kilo on intelligence
duties down in the Aegean Sea gets vectored onto a pair of destroyers,
and it manages to sink them both, before resuming its intelligence
gathering. For some reason they were not using their active sonar. The
Kilo which laid the southern minefield also spots some ships (missile
boats out of Golcuk) and manages to kill one and startle another, but
that now leaves him with no anti-ship torpedoes. (Most of his magazines
had been filled with mines.) Hopefully he’ll not need them.

**FEB13 – First night**

As evening falls the last of my attack planes and bombers are landing at
their bases and preparing loadouts for the next day’s work. With no
effective night attack capability, the entire force will stand down for
the night, and be ready for a dawn attack tomorrow. Naturally, this
makes it the perfect time for HQ to announce that they want us to
destroy a Turkish government radio station which has started trying to
assert control over the coup situation. Within the hour, no less!

I literally have no ready attack planes, and even if I did they wouldn’t
be able to see in the dark to make their attacks. There’s no such thing
as a Russian TLAM in my fleet, and nothing’s remotely in range for NGFS.
I could try and use a fighter to strafe (if I could see in the dark),
but that wouldn’t be enough to destroy the transmitter building. The
only thing I have is some of my missile boats, which are equipped with
Styx missiles with a ground attack capability. These are promptly given
orders to rush for the coast at flank speed, but it takes them far more
than an hour to get within range. Before they can arrive the GRU takes
care of the station, and I am informed that my lack of support has been
noted. The life of a Soviet commander is a never-ending joy!

One of my patrol boats does, however, get sent to bombard and destroy a
coastal radar at Zonguldak, which it accomplishes easily, before turning
west to engage the next coastal radar at Kefken. Attacking that radar
with guns would bring him into range of Harpoons on the Turkish fleet,
so he fires a pair of Styx missiles at it before turning for home. They
fail to hit anything, which is probably indicative of how well an attack
on the radio station would have gone.

The situation along the Greek border has been fairly calm so far, with
occasional fighter skirmishes during the afternoon, but now the fighting
intensifies dramatically, as more Bulgarian fighters come on-line, and I
begin making fighter sweeps. My MiG-23s learn that their all aspect
AA-8s (normally a short-ranged weakness against something like an F-16)
are a tremendous advantage against F-5s carrying rear-aspect missiles,
and they begin aggressively hunting them down, as well as using their
AA-7s to fence with F-16s and F-4s. After a little of this, my Aegean
Kilo (on ESM duty) begins reporting large numbers of Mirages launching
out of southern Greece. Emissions indicate these are mostly Mirage F1s,
the attack version of the Mirage. There are at least a dozen of them,
but where are they going? To attack my ships?

This prompts me to start launching a significant number of fighters in
response, and soon there’s a massive engagement with all sorts of planes
over northern Greece and the Sea of Marmora. It turns out the Mirages
are loaded with Sidewinders, and aren’t attacking anything in
particular, but the fight is on. My MiG-23s try to take AA-7 shots from
outside Sidewinder range, while running away from the better missiles on
F-4s and Mirage 2000s, and MiG-29s arrive from the coast to try and play
their part too. The Mig-21s get into the action, using afterburner
dashes to try and pick off planes which are returning home low on fuel,
or distracting long-range shooters to lead them astray. (Attempts to
take them into combat against alert opponents with all-aspect missiles
are futile.) I have to pick my fights, and avoid the temptation to close
in, but the engagements generally go in my favour.

Throughout this the enemy’s SAMs are a constant obstacle, particularly
the HAWKs on the Greek mainland, and the Nike in Turkey. They don’t
actually shoot me down, but I keep getting forced to burner out of the
edges of their envelope, and my freedom of maneuver is constantly being
restricted. My own SAMs participate too, and my long-range SA-5s
actually manage to claim a number of kills. During the day the enemy
could see the missiles coming far off and dive to safety below the radar
horizon, but now it seems like they don’t see them coming in the dark
until it’s much too late, and the SAM crews claim a number of better
enemy aircraft this way.

The MiG-25s launch another anti-AWACs raid, and this one is much more
carefully supported given how close they came to being caught last time.
An Su-15 lure, two flights of MiG-25 fully loaded to kick in the door,
two flights of lightly loaded planes to dash in for the kill, two more
lightly loaded flights to cover their retreat, and a final flight fully
loaded to act as a backstop. Sheesh…. But it worked, killing two F-4s on
the way in, getting two AWACS (a second one was coming to relieve the
first), missing the tanker but killing a refuelling F-16, and killing
two more pursuing F-4s on the way out. There was a brief moment when
active radar homing heads were detected in pursuit, but an afterburner
dash let my planes outdistance them. Clearly there are angry Americans
down south!

Things have calmed down in the air now, as most of my Bulgarian fighters
are reloading, and I want my pilots fresh for morning activities. At
sea, the Kilo at the south end of the Bosporus detected a creeping SS
and used one if its two remaining torpedoes to sink an ancient Tench
class sub, which first saw action sinking Japanese freighters in WWII.
Surveillance radar flights have also noticed the loss of several
merchant ships to the Bosporus minefields, as well as a flotilla of
Turkish missile boats passing safely through the hole in the minefield
and heading north through the strait. They’re halfway through the
straits now, and hopefully they’ll hit some mines at the north end.
Meanwhile a destroyer, on a slightly different course hit a mine and
sank, marking the first military loss to the lurking explosives.

I have had several warnings about rebel aircraft flying defensive
patrols over the Ankara area and along the coast against the Greeks, but
so far, I haven’t spotted any activity in that area. I’ll keep an eye
out for further developments.

**THOUGHTS FOR NEXT DAY**

If nothing else happens tonight, my intention is to rest my planes as
best I can, and then have a major raid hit the Bosporus area as soon as
they can see to target things. Everything coming from the USSR airfields
will be going here, as well as most of the planes in western Romania and
Bulgaria. My first priority will be to finish destroying the coastal
forts, and then the coastal outposts. Second priority will be dealing
with local air defences, third will be tackling concentrations of armour
east of Constantinople, and fourth will be continuing the destruction of
local troop units. Some of the more distant Bulgarian planes will also
tackle the Nike site and the radar station in the Dardanelles. I may
just be able to recycle some aircraft for a dusk strike, but a 10 hour
recycle time and short winter days makes that difficult.

At sea, amphibious forces will continue to advance, limited by the
presence of the Turkish missile boats. Those must be sunk first. I
anticipate being able to kill them with Shaddocks once they clear the
Bosporus, hopefully while still dark. If that is accomplished, then I
can have some forces dash in for NGFS at dawn. If all goes well, then
the go will be given for an ASW sweep off the beaches, and the landing
by mid-day. If not, then we can pause for a day, and commit the
following morning.

I’m not sure what to expect in terms of NATO offensive action. I’m
certain there will be some sort of strike once they spot my ships, but I
think I can limit its effectiveness. Incoming heavy army units
(especially if not spotted on the march) could be a real problem after
the landing, especially as much of my attack airpower will be spent by
then.

I continue to wonder what the Americans are up to. (Presumably sinking
our Mediterranean comrades.) They have the potential to make a real mess
of the situation. Some TLAMs into a bomber base could be nasty surprise
tonight, for instance. Or some F-15s could make a right mess of my
attack planes. They’re a real wild-card.

A little more progress to report.

**FEB 14 – pre-dawn operations**

Both sides take the opportunity to rest their air-forces overnight,
while the landing force continues to advance towards the Bosporus. Radar
operators begin to report signs of the rebel air activity, as some NATO
contacts are observed running intercepts on each other. They don’t seem
to be shooting, but they are taking up each others time and fuel, which
is good for us.

The Turkish missile boat flotilla passes north through the Bosporus, and
our air-laid minefields pay off handsomely, eventually sinking or
crippling the entire fleet. The few drifting stragglers are dealt with
by long-range missile shots. The Turks still have a destroyer and some
minesweepers approaching the south end of the Bosporus, in the Sea of
Marmora, but my task-force’s long-range Shaddock missiles prove
excellent for destroying these lightly defended targets. The big old
missiles fly over Constantinople at high altitude, and then descend to
make their attack once they are over open water again. When the
explosions are complete this leaves three more minesweepers coming out
of the Erdek naval base further south, but they won’t make it to the
Bosporus for some time, so they are not a current concern.

With the Turkish ship-launched missile threat eliminated, my own missile
boat flotillas accelerate their approach to the coast, as do a variety
of patrol boats and frigates from the Bulgarian and Romanian ports.
Those which have 76mm guns will provide fire support for the upcoming
landings, engaging coastal strong-points and troops near the shore. For
the moment, they loiter just outside of the radar range of the forts.

Further south in the Aegean, my Kilo (which had been on ESM duty) lowers
its mast and heads west towards the position of a destroyer it had noted
before, eventually intercepting and sinking it. This makes three
destroyer kills for that sub, none of which were using their active
sonar. As my sub clears the area and resumes ESM patrols it detects yet
another warship’s emissions further west, but for the moment I am not
moving to engage. The ESM warning will be more valuable during the
morning’s air operations.

The last hours of darkness are used by the one set of attack planes
which do not need to see their targets – my ARM shooters. Some of my
Fitters with AS-12s are escorted into the Bosporus area to engage the
next layer of surveillance radars. My escorting Foxbats have to kill a
pair of Mirage 2000s that try and engage, and there is a tense moment as
rebel planes make a flyby to ID our strike package. Have we made a
mistake, and let them get too close? After a tense approach, everyone
holds their fire and our strike proceeds without incident.
Unfortunately, the radars on the coastal fortifications are not
radiating, but one other coastal radar, and a number of air search
radars, are destroyed by the strike, and the Nike south of the
Dardanelles is damaged. This should give us a few more kilometers of
operating room before the Turks can see our incoming strikes.

**FEB 14 – initial morning strikes**

Major strike operations begin with long duration surveillance planes
(mostly various ELINT Badgers) lifting off in the dark to head for their
stations, and then the wave of recce, escort, and strike aircraft begin
to converge on the Bosporus as light grows in the sky.

The first to arrive are the Su-24s, which use their heavy PGMs to finish
the destruction of the major coastal fortifications. The remaining coast
defence outposts are destroyed by Fitters with AS-14s, and other lesser
PGMs are used to engage air defences. I may actually be striking too
early, while it is still dawn, since my planes have some difficulty
spotting targets despite having half a dozen recce planes acting as
dedicated FACs. Nonetheless, they do the best they can. Bomb-laden
MiG-23s and MiG-27s do a lot of the initial work engaging troop
concentrations, joined by Su-25s as the daylight grows. Attacks in the
Bosporus area manage to disrupt large numbers of infantry deployed west
of Istanbul, but there are still plenty left north of Istanbul along the
west bank, and it seems that the more troops I hit the more I find. Most
worrying is the spotting of an armoured formation across the Bosporus,
SE from Istanbul. Those will definitely need to be hit before they can
go far. I don’t have swarms of American-style anti-tank PGMs and attack
helicopters, so preventing the armour from getting into my vulnerable
newly-landed troops may be difficult.

The large armoured concentration I had previously spotted east of Golcuk
gets its own special set of strikes, but the results are less effective
than I had hoped. I manage to suppress much of the air defences using
AS-10s, but Floggers with iron bombs have little effect on the sturdy
tanks. I scuff the paint and knock off a track or two, but I’d estimate
the tanks have suffered less than 5% attrition. The mechanized infantry
is more vulnerable, and the results are better there, completely
destroying several elements and damaging more, probably accounting for
\~ 20% of the formation. A third formation and the artillery park remain
essentially untouched. When this formation gets moving I could be in
real trouble, unless my ATGMs can make up for the difference. I have a
few more strikes yet to come during the day (although I had hoped to use
them closer to the Bosporus), and the heavy bombers will arrive in the
afternoon, so I may yet have a chance to knock them back more. I really
wish I had plentiful effective cluster bombs, but 1990s Russians love
their iron bombs, and the smaller ones just aren’t good enough against
armour.

Some of the MiG-23s, launching from Krasnodar in the east, continue west
and land in Romania, where they will be closer to the action for
subsequent strikes. A number of my Ukranian MiG-23s (initially tasked
for anti-shipping work) are also used for a PGM strike on Merzifon, the
site of the earlier massacre of my low-level attackers. They’re carrying
AS-7s, which may be old, but they have a higher operational ceiling than
the Rapier. Accompanied by a recce plane FAC and a flight of Mig-29s,
they make their own massacre, destroying the SAMs and some of the
accompanying AAA. No enemy planes are spotted at the airbase, but if I
need to shut the runways I now have a clear route to get in at low
altitude.

The Turkish airforce is essentially a no-show during this time. Aside
from a pair of F-4s which come to investigate the attack on Merzifon,
there is no sign of them. The Greeks, however, are a constant thorn in
my side, with numerous patrols coming up to meet me. I can’t afford to
let them get within dash range of my vulnerable strikers over the
Bosporus, so I find myself fighting deeper and deeper into the Aegean,
to keep them at a safe distance. They’ve got good long-range missiles
too – F-4s with Sparrow, and Mirage 2000s with R530s – so I can’t rely
on AA-7s to keep them at arm’s length. Screening MiG-29s and MiG-25s get
drawn into the fight, and many of the latter don’t have the fuel to get
back to their distant Ukrainian home. Consequently, many of them divert
into Ravnets in Bulgaria, planning to refuel for a few hours before
dashing back to home base later in the morning. The Greeks even try
launching what I presume was an anti-shipping strike after my missile
boats are spotted near the coast, but that doesn’t get far, and the A-7s
and F-5s are cut down with few survivors.

My patrol boats, in the meantime are closing in to conduct coastal
bombardments (staying away from my minefields, of course). The results
are mixed, with my two eastern groups doing a reasonably useful job on
nearer troop and AAA units (although some targets just seem
invulnerable). The western group of five Tarantuls (very good boats
those) gets a shock when one of them suddenly vanishes in a thunderous
explosion. Torpedo! Now Tarantuls are nearly as fast as the torpedoes,
so they have a good chance of out-distancing them, but only if they run
in the right direction. Unfortunately, the Tarantuls are blind, and they
don’t have a clue which way the shot came from. The flotilla leader
makes his decision, sets a course, and orders flank speed. Foam flies,
and mighty engines roar! Alas, it’s all futile. The Turkish SS skipper
watches in delight as the boats run right into his torpedo spread, and
one after another, the remaining four disintegrate from shattering
torpedo impacts. The western beaches will get no NGFS until the landing
force itself arrives. (In retrospect, I should have scattered the pack
and sent the individuals in all directions. That might have saved one or
two. Still, better to lose missile boats than troop ships, I guess.)

Fortunately, the Turks aren’t having it all their way. I had been
keeping the ASW planes near the landing fleet, for fear of SAMs near the
beaches, but now they’re ordered to the front. One does indeed get shot
at by a Redeye gunner, but the shot misses, and the others find that
murderous sub and sink it. I’m sending many of my reserve Be-12s hunting
now, because if there’s another sub there then I could loose most of a
landing group. My eastern missile boats sink an oiler that tries to
sortie from Golcuk, and some Bulgarian Mig-21s swoop in and sink the
three minelayers that were headed up the Sea of Marmara. Their
colleagues also bomb a smaller surveillance radar and finish off the
damaged Nike site, taking a couple more radars out of the equation.

No further action from the coup to report. Perhaps it’s shot its bolt?

**THOUGHTS FOR MID-DAY**

Unless I want to wave them off, my landing ships will arrive shortly
after mid-day. In the east they’ll have reasonably easy going at first,
but they have two armoured formations on their side of the Bosporus,
which will be tough to face. In the west, there will be more enemy
troops at first, but they’re mostly infantry, so the threat should be
lower. So far, I haven’t seen any armour on that side. (Although I
haven’t looked very far either. I should definitely schedule a recce run
towards the Greek border.) The eastern armour is what worries me the
most. I have some additional strike planes (mostly Bulgarian) which will
ready through the day, but the rest are mostly flying home now, and the
majority of those won’t be ready again before it’s too dark to see. I
don’t expect to be able to eliminate the enemy with the remaining attack
planes. The heavy bombers would be useful against static troop
concentrations, but I’m not certain how realistic it would be to use
them against movers. Should I hold off the landing until late afternoon,
to let the bombers go to work? Or land as soon as I can, make a
defensive perimeter, and prepare to receive the blow which I’d expect in
the late afternoon or early evening? Or bombard all day and land
tomorrow morning? As tempting as it is to wait and bombard, I think in
reality while grabbing the Bosporus rapidly might work (maybe, barely),
giving the Turks an extra day to recover, mobilize, and organize would
be disastrous. City fighting in suburban Istanbul against Turks
defending their homeland. What could go wrong?

I’ll need to make a decision soon, and it needs to be better than my
missile boat course!

---

"Sir, I'm getting an SRS-4 contact! Fighter radars, very high power,
crossing the southern tip of Greece. I make it eight of them sir."

"Are those Tomcats, sir? Sir?"

---

Had a bit more game time on the weekend, so here’s the next installment.

**FEB 14 – morning operations**

As morning progresses, the planning staff pump more coffee into the
bleary-eyed commander, and try to convince him to pay attention to the
detailed schedules of what /assets are available to support the landing
operations. (Translation: I finally got organised and started making a
mapped list.)

<img src="/assets\images\aar\mf\mf1\mf1_aj\image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:4.70625in" />

It turns out that there is more out there than I had realized,
particularly among the lesser Romanian and Bulgarian /assets, and I
should be able to generate several waves of attacks at 8:30, 10:30, and
12:30, to support a landing at 13:00 hrs. Courses and speeds of the
amphibious forces are adjusted to match this timing, and takeoff times
are set for the waiting paratroopers. All is in readiness, and the final
go is given!

The first wave of attacks at 08:30 concentrates on units near the south
end of the Bosporus. Su-25s, carrying very heavy bomb loads, just manage
to struggle to the western bank and finish the destruction of the
infantry formations there. Other attackers pass over the Bosporus to hit
the remaining mechanized formations on the east shore, and their cluster
bombs prove to be very effective. Incoming BDA reports suggest the
formation is no longer combat effective, and only a few damaged
stragglers and the remains of the AAA are left in the area.

The next wave at 10:30 was to be two parts – short ranged planes
continuing to make strikes in the Bosporus area, and longer ranged
planes flying further east to attack the major mechanized formations
beyond Golcuk. However, with the success of the earlier strike, there
aren’t any major targets left near the Bosporus, and the short-ranged
planes don’t have the legs to hit the more distant targets. They could
be used to hit remaining flack, but that seems to be a risky move with
little payoff, so I elect to hold them on the ground in reserve. If I’ve
missed another Turkish formation, then they will be ready as a quick
reaction reserve. The second part of the 10:30 attack proceeds as
planned, and the MiG-23s use AS-7s to eliminate more of the air defences
around the distant artillery, and then the bomb-carrying planes swoop in
low to completely destroy the guns, as well as inflicting some more
damage on the mechanized infantry formations.

The aircraft haven’t been having all the fun, and my missile boats
continue their coastal bombardment work as they engage the broken
remains of defensive infantry formations. The eastern landing beaches
are cleared of known enemy troops by a storm of rapid-fire 76mm shells,
but the western beaches (where that sub destroyed my entire patrol boat
flotilla) is bare of support. Into this gap steams the ancient and
unfortunately named Smeli, an ultra-utilitarian Riga class frigate built
back in the 1950s, in the time before Sputnik flew. Its three 100mm guns
start thumping away, slowly and steadily hammering the remaining troops
under the guidance of a FAC overhead. She is eventually joined by more
light craft from further up the coast, and between them the landing
beaches are cleared.

Meanwhile, my heavy shipping is getting closer to the shore, and the
Admiral Gorshkov's long-ranged SS-N-12 missiles can now reach deep into
the Aegean. The enemy destroyer there is threatening the operations of
my submarine on ELINT duty, so a salvo is sent its way. The destroyer
easily spots the high-altitude missiles, and it shoots some down, but
the Gorshkov's captain has learned the lesson of his shore-based
counterpart, and there are too many incoming missiles for the destroyer
to stop. It only takes one hit, and the destroyer is torn in two. Other
ships use shorter range missiles to strike the minelayers which are
advancing towards the Bosporus, and these defenceless targets soon die
to a missile each.

All this activity just off their shores seems to have provoked a
reaction from the Turks, and mid-morning they launch a large strike from
airfields at Merzifon and Konya. The strike seems to be primarily F-5s
(over two dozen of them!), and it’s not clear exactly what it’s
targeting, since it seems to be on a course for the Crimea. This
delights the MiG-29 pilots in Gvardeyskoye. Many of them have been
sitting out the battle, since they are only armed with short-ranged
AA-11 missiles, but a brace of defenceless F-5s with rear-aspect
missiles is the perfect target. They fall on the cloud of advancing
strikers, shoving aside MiG-23s in their haste, and between them both
they manage to destroy almost all of the enemy.

Throughout the morning, Spetznaz teams on deep recce missions have
occasionally reported sighting large aircraft in the area where the E-3s
had been patrolling. I haven’t had any indication of AWACS radar
emissions, so presumably they’re seeing tankers. These could still be
enabling prolonged fighter patrols or strikes, so another deep Foxbat
raid is sent in (not quite as large this time), killing a tanker and a
couple of fighters before withdrawing in good order. Hopefully this will
further disrupt NATO operations. (We do pick up American F-16 radar
emissions down south again, but so far, we’ve not seen any of their
major combat /assets.)

My final wave of Warpac attackers at 12:30 is actually preceded by major
activity in the Ukraine. The first of the bombers are ready again, and
the Backfires surge into the air and hasten towards the eastern armoured
formations, hoping to get to troops before they leave their assembly
areas. Roaring in at 1,000 meters up, they lay strings of massive 3,000
lb bombs across the static tank formations. Previous attackers with
small bombs didn’t do much, but these heavy weapons can flip over entire
tanks and tear off turrets. The smoking ruin they leave behind makes the
commander smile – the elimination of those tanks takes tremendous
pressure off the landing forces. Not content with that, other bombers
make more attacks, and the mechanized infantry formations take heavy
blows. The 12:30 strike from Bulgaria is in the air and on the way with
numerous cluster bombs to continue the attack, and the situation looks
good for us.

Not so good for the coup plotters, perhaps. I’ve seen no sign of new
coup activity since before dawn, and I suspect they’re being rounded up
and shot by now. Still, the confusion they caused was probably helpful
in giving us an extra half a day of time.

**FEB 14 – LANDINGS \~ 12:45 hours**

While the air strikes have been ongoing, massive streams of Soviet
transport aircraft have been converging on the Bosporus, dropping to low
altitude as they approach the coast, and flying to their designated drop
zones.

The short-ranged An-26s barely have the range to make it to the coast,
dropping their paratroopers to seize the ekranoplan landing site on the
NE of the Bosporus, before turning to land at nearby bases along the
Bulgarian and Romanian coasts. They’ll be pushed off the taxiways onto
the grass, for the moment, before eventually being refuelled and sent
home. The paratroopers find the landing site is unoccupied, so they
consolidate their perimeter and send the go-code back home. Soon the
ekranoplans are winging their way south with supplies for the troops.

The An-12s and An-22s out of Odessa head for open ground west of
Istanbul, where their paratroopers land without opposition. I don’t
expect a large amount of enemy formations on the west side, and they
will be expected to control access to Istanbul on their own for the
moment.

All the IL-76s bring their troops in on the SW side of the Bosporus, in
the limited ground around the Samandra civil airport. They have to pack
into a very limited area, and the commander looks the other way when
staff try and report on how many men were crushed by falling BMDs, but
eventually the troops manage to make it down. There is one nervous
moment when the low-flying stream of transports finds an active 35mm AAA
position in their path. This contact had been briefly spotted and then
lost again earlier in the day, and the intelligence clearly didn’t get
passed on to the transport crews. Most divert around it, but one plane
loses an engine and has another damaged while its troops frantically
bail out. The plane staggers away smoking, and the troops watch the
remainder of their comrades fly past. Then, to get their revenge, they
set up their 120mm mortar and pound the offending 35mm gun into rubble.

On the coast, landing ships and hovercraft make it to the beach and
unload without any opposition, and begin to consolidate their formation.
Approximately one third land west of the Bosporus, and the bulk of the
formation land on the east side, where I expect more risk of enemy
activity. The landing craft immediately turn back to head towards
Sevastopol (or the tanker coming down the Bulgarian coast, in the case
of the hovercraft), but many of the escorting ships will stay just
offshore to provide SAM cover for the landing beaches.

**FEB 14 – NATO reactions early afternoon**

NATO ground troops don’t hesitate, and the moment my forces hit the
ground they begin to react. My SE air landing is quite close to the
remains of the mechanized formation in the area, and the stragglers
advance and open fire before my drop is complete. Their IFV autocannons
are like laser-beam death-rays, compared with my 73mm guns, and my AT-5s
are demonstrating appallingly bad accuracy for an ATGM. Fortunately,
there’s a lot more of me than them, and direct fire, combined with some
hastily set up mortars, manages to destroy them. Curiously, their
remaining air defences (mostly towed 12.7s) pass me by and withdraw to
the east. I’m not sure where they’re going. Perhaps they are trying to
regroup on a defensive line further east. They’re as fast as I am, so I
only manage to catch a few before they’re out of reach.

The remaining NATO troops on the west bank (a scattering of damaged air
defences and lesser troops) don’t seem to be making aggressive moves or
withdrawing at the moment. My recce planes are occupied elsewhere, so
I’m not actually certain about this.

The surviving elements of the major mechanized force out east (two
battered mech inf formations in M113s) also start moving, and they’re
coming west, towards my troops. Fortunately, I have the 12:30 strike of
attack planes with cluster-bombs inbound, which should tear them up
further. Unfortunately, they’re not the only moving element out there.
Spetznaz elements posted just east of Golcuk, begin making excited
reports about a tank formation near Izmit, at least a couple of
companies, maybe a battalion, headed my way. Recce overflights had
spotted some of their formation yesterday, during the raid on the Nike
sites, but once again the information was filed and forgotten. Now their
reappearance in strength is an unwelcome development. The 12:30 strike
will have to hit them instead, and then hopefully attack planes from
Crimea can deal with the other formations. Orders are given, and then
NATO changes my plans again.

Spetznaz teams begin reporting multiple bogies lifting off at Konya,
down south and then at Eskisehir. They’re seeing multiple F-5s, F-4s,
and RF-4s, and the count soon numbers in the dozens. A major strike’s
coming my way, and to make matters worse there are also reports of over
a dozen F-104s forming up in the skies over Athens. The Eskisehir
situation is a real problem, since I’ve done nothing about that airfield
so far. I knew it was a major base by size, and I’d spotted the heavy
Rapier defences around it, so it was obviously a valued asset. It’s only
about 100 miles away from the landing beaches and drop zones, so my
reaction time is very limited if they launch from it. Yet, I’d done
nothing about it, and all my strikes always seemed to have something
better to do. I’d seen no activity there, so I had shrugged my shoulders
and waved it away as possibly unoccupied or far down the readiness
chain. It’s a beautiful example of confirmation bias. I don’t want any
enemy in Eskisehir, I haven’t spotted any enemy hanging around outside
in Eskisehir, therefore there are no enemy in Eskisehir! Wrong….

The enemy has sprung an entire “new” airbase on me, but fortunately I
have a “new” airbase too. I’ve got a dozen MiG-29s at my closest base at
Ravnets (plus three -B models), and I’ve kept them in reserve all this
time as my emergency air defence reaction force. I think I will have to
use it now, since most of my other bases are too far away to get there
in time. Those other bases are launching anyway (the F-104s still have
to be dealt with later), but the Ravnets squadron are the only new
planes I can add to the fight before the strike arrives.

My expeditionary force isn’t completely without cover. I have Mig-25s
and some MiG-29s loitering in the area already, and they close in to
begin the engagement. The MiG-25s engage first, launching before the
F-4s can, but they don’t have a lot of missiles, and their hit rate is
low. They get some kills, but they’re soon reduced to being a
distraction, trying to draw enemy fire and then burner out of range at
high Mach. My MiG-29s have Alamos, which have range parity with the
Sparrow, but their radar is sub-standard, and the F-4s inevitably launch
first, so the Fulcrums spend more of their time running than shooting,
and the enemy continues to advance. Each F-4 has a pair of Sparrows, and
it’s proving to be a real problem to get past that. Fortunately, some
turn back after shooting, before resuming their course, which gives me a
bit more time. The Slava gives me some help at the critical moment,
lighting up its radar and firing a barrage of 6 high-powered SAMs into
the enemy formation, killing a few and forcing others down low. That’s
where the MiG-29s shine, and now they get their short-range missiles
into play and begin to destroy the Eskisehir strike. The fight whirls
down around the Golcuk naval base, and it turns out there’s some 35mm
AAA there which takes an unpleasant bite out of one of my MiGs.

As the Eskisehir strike is driven back, I have a few minutes for my
12:30 cluster bomb strike (which had been driven away for fear of the
enemy raid passing right over their target) to come back and pummel that
new tank formation. Cluster bombs work wonders, and by the time my
planes are gone there are only a few tanks left, which I hope my
defences can handle when they get to my troops.

The Konya strike (F-5s and F-4s) comes immediately on the heels of my
retreating attack planes, and once again my MiG-29s keep getting forced
to run away by the steady stream of Sparrows from the F-4s. Nonetheless,
they must run out of Sparrows eventually, and I should be able to handle
that raid too, shortly before it reaches my troops.

**FEB 14 – Americans!**

That’s when the dreaded call comes in. “Tomcats over southern Greece!”
The Americans are coming…

Up to this point I have been able to hold my own in the air against
medium range missiles like Sparrow and R530, but I’ve got nothing that
can compete with a Phoenix. Things may get very nasty in the air.

If the Americans are just here as an escort, to support the incoming
F-104s, for example, then I may be able to fall back and let my
ship-based SAMs and land based MANPADS and flack handle the old attack
planes while taking only minimal damage. However, if they’re here as
part of a complete strike package, with jammers and HARMs and heavy
bomb-loads backed up with good search optics, then I may have a much
worse time of it.

Therefore, the following orders are issued:

MiG-29s and supporting fighters will continue to fight the Konya raid,
and then fall back towards the Black Sea near the Bosporus.

Troops in the beaches will rush to combine forces and activate what SAM
defences they have.

Air defence warships will move at flank speed to provide SAM cover for
troops on shore.

Other warships and amphibious vessels will retire at full speed towards
the Crimea.

Paratroops will hurry as best they can to place a ring of MANPADS and
flack around their formations, while sheltering valuable units
(particularly artillery) in the center.

Non-essential aircraft (ELINT, FAC, etc.) and incoming heavy bombers
will withdraw and loiter over the sea (or Romania).

Jamming aircraft will concentrate over the Black Sea behind the capital
ships.

Once that is done, planning staff will begin preparation for a late
afternoon attack on Eskisehir with intention to shut the runways.

We shall see what happens….

Another weekend, a bit more game time, so...

**FEB 14 – early afternoon**

The Konya strike of F-5s and F-4s is pressing towards my landing beaches
from the Golcuk direction, there’s a pack of F-104s hurtling my way
across the Aegean, and the ominous signals of F-14 radars are
concentrating over southern Greece. It’s afternoon in Turkey. What’s a
tourist to do?

As my amphibs turn to hurry back to Sevastopol, my warships rush to put
SAM cover in place over the landing beaches, and troops on the ground
scramble to arrange themselves in coherent defensive postures. My empty
hovercraft are heading west along the coast towards Burgas, but they
don’t have the fuel to get there, so they meet up with their tanker near
the defences at the south end of the Bulgarian coast, and then proceed
home at good speed.

The Konya strike continues to press me back, but when their Sparrows run
out my planes are able to get in amongst them, and they destroy the raid
before it can reach its targets. A pair of MiG-29s which were patrolling
the coast further east manage to sweep in from behind and mess up the
planes in the Eskisehir landing pattern too, which is also gratifying.

Down in the Aegean the F-104s are coming in in a pack, about a dozen of
them, and they’re moving very fast under afterburner. I’ve got nothing
that can match their speed (my MiG-25s are heading home empty by now),
but one flight of old MiG-21s is directly in their path, and might be
able to take some unopposed shots as they fly past me. I turn in front
of them, relying on their overtake, and that’s when the F-104s open
fire. They’re up on an air superiority mission! It never occurred to me
that these high-speed antiques would be used that way. I’d assumed they
were on a bombing dash. Whoops! One of the MiG-21s manage to twist out
of the way while the other goes down in flames, and as the F-104s turn
to fight I have time to bring in Bulgarian MiG-23s and more MiG-21s. As
fast as they are (and they can change altitude like a rocket), the
F-104s are at a disadvantage against radar guided missiles and
forward-aspect homers, and the fight eventually goes my way.

In the meantime, I’ve been anxiously watching the signals of the Tomcats
coming across the southern tip of Greece. Now I can detect four or five
EA-6s with them, so this is going to be more than an escort sweep. I’ve
pulled most of my Ukrainian planes back towards the beaches, while the
Bulgarian ones are retiring up along the north coast of the Aegean,
hoping to stay out of Phoenix range. I do want to test their responses,
however, so two of the Bulgarian MiG-29s are sent towards the F-14s at
medium altitude. My hope is that when the Phoenixes launch I will have
time to dive to the deck and beam the missiles. The combination of
sea-skimming in a very agile plane with chaff might drop the hit rate
low enough that the Fulcrums can survive to close the range. If that
works, I’ve got a large number of MiG-29s forming up near the beaches,
and we’ll try that tactic en-masse. Casualties will be high, but it may
be the only method I’ve got.

So the two white-faced pilots turn and close on the approaching F-14s.
The enemy don’t fire. The Fulcrums get closer still. The Tomcats still
don’t fire. What’s going on? Our jamming isn’t that good, and they must
clearly see us. The MiGs have their radar on, so the EA-6s must have
ID-ed us. Why don’t they shoot? It’s not ‘till we’re only 55 miles out
that they open fire – with Sparrows! They’re not carrying Phoenixes! Now
an F-14 with Phoenix is a fearsome beast, but an F-14 without Phoenix is
just a funny looking F-4. And I can deal with F-4s…

New orders beam out from ground control. General Attack! My pilots turn
and fly towards the foe. The first fight begins as the dozen F-14s turn
north and engage my planes coming over the north coast of the Aegean,
and my initial optimism starts to cool. They may just be “F-4s”, but
their missiles still outrange me greatly, and with their powerful radars
they can engage to the full limit of their range, and then turn and
leave. My planes spend a lot of time running away on afterburner, and by
the time the F-14s have stopped shooting at me and turned back, I don’t
have enough fuel left to use burners to catch them. I’m not going to lay
a glove on them. I do, however, have a flight of MiG-23s coming in from
the NW, perfectly placed to cut off their retreat! That’s when a pack of
F-5s pops up behind me out of Thessalonika, and I’m forced to turn to
defend myself. By the time that’s over, the Floggers have used most of
their missiles, and they only manage to lightly damage a couple of
F-14s. They all get away.

But, while the escort F-14s have been diverted to the fighting up north,
two more groups of F-14s have shown up, and these ones are pressing in
towards my landing beaches. I get forced back repeatedly by their
Sparrows, but I have far more planes there than they do. The enemy gets
most of the way up the Sea of Marmara before their missiles run out, but
they press on nonetheless, and my swarm descends around them. None of
the Bombcats make it out of the cloud of MiGs, and there is great
celebration at the control centers. The jubilation increases when my
fighters continue to sweep south, destroying the valuable EA-6s, a
flight of Greek Corsairs, and a pack of S-3s pretending they’re bombers.
A sound defeat for the imperialist aggressors!

**FEB 14 – late afternoon**

Once the Americans have been driven off, my strike planes return.
Attackers from Bulgaria swoop in with iron bombs and cluster bombs, and
manage to destroy and disperse the last of the Turkish reaction forces
which were advancing in my direction, as well as cleaning up some
scattered AAA and damaged infantry units on the west bank of the
Bosporus. In the east, recce planes have spotted some small troop
concentrations behind the line of coastal defences, and those receive
explosive gifts too, particularly the artillery units. MiG-23s with
AS-7s prove to be particularly useful for picking off light AAA and
MANPADS units so the remaining planes can attack safely from low level.
There is a fairly large concentration of infantry at the headlands near
Kefken, and those static troops are engaged by level-bombing Badgers,
who sprinkle the area with bombs doing a moderate amount of damage.

Turkish airbase and naval infrastructure are the target of the next
series of attacks. Eskisehir is the first to get hammered, as Ukrainian
Fitters strike the air defences with powerful AS-14s, letting Backfires
and Blinders safely pound the runway and taxiways with heavy bombs.
Su-24s arrive a little later to finish the destruction of the runways
with heavy PGMs. Level bombers also strike the soft targets (hangars,
etc.) at Eskisehir and a couple of other airbases, but most of the enemy
aircraft are safely tucked away in their hardened shelters, I imagine,
so this has only moderate effect.

Other than the sub pens on the Black Sea, I haven’t struck any naval
facilities yet, being reasonably confident I could handle the Turkish
navy at sea. That was fine when they were at a distance, but now another
destroyer gets underway at Golcuk, and promptly salvos its Harpoons at
the retiring amphibious fleet. This prompts a hasty afterburner dash
from orbiting fighters, which manage to catch the missiles a few
kilometers before they reach their target. (A swift counter-barrage from
my Sovremmenys sinks the destroyer with no difficulty.) I don’t need any
more surprises, so Su-24s and MiG-27s strike piers and sub pens at
Golcuk and Erdek, while Blinders return to complete the destruction at
Bartin. I don’t expect any further Turkish naval activity this side of
the Dardanelles (barring subs already in the water, of course).

**FEB 14 – evening and night**

As the sun sets NATO persists in trying to hit the beaches (or perhaps
the ships patrolling nearby). Several flights of attack planes, usually
four Phantoms at a time, try flying in from the Athens area, but their
attempts are futile. The Bulgarians have got the rhythm for dealing with
these isolated attacks now, sweeping in from the flank and engaging from
behind with short-ranged missiles. MiG-29s are deadly at this game, and
even the MiG-21s get some respectable kills, given the horrible hit rate
of their ancient AA-2s. None of the enemy make it beyond the Sea of
Marmara.

It’s a good thing they can handle these attacks using limited resources,
because most of my fighter planes are initially down for refueling after
the big enemy attack. More pressingly, I’ve also got a shortage of
air-to-air missiles which is forcing many of my better planes into
reserve. In the growing darkness, some of my fighter pilots are pressed
into “missile ferry” duty, hauling 6-packs of surplus AA-11s from
Gabrovnitsa and Gvardeyskoye to Ravnets, on the Bulgarian cost, where
they can be mated up with the surplus of AA-10s which are there. Most of
this cross-leveling is completed before midnight, and the bulk of my
MiG-29 fleet is eventually reloaded and resting at their home bases.

Submarine activity also picks up in the evening, as two separate Turkish
submarines raise masts to snorkel a few hours apart, one at each end of
the Dardanelles. Fortunately, the surface search radars on the Be-12s
doing ASW duty at the landing beaches have just enough range to pick
them up, and the flying boats manage to sink both subs. (Although one
has a very exciting adventure when a passing F-4 on one of the raids
takes a Sparrow shot at it, missing by the narrowest of margins.)

During the evening we also receive some encouraging intelligence about
the coup. It’s not dead after all! It seems to be making good headway,
and causing all sorts of mobilization delays for the Turks. The
commander makes sure to praise the efforts of his comrades in the
political warfare directorate, just as the zampolit is walking by…

**Plans for FEB 15**

The identified enemy mobile formations are dispersed now, so I feel my
ground troops are reasonably secure for the moment. If the coup reports
are correct, and mobilization is severely delayed, I don’t expect any
immediate threat against them on the ground. They will continue to hold
their position.

The situation seems reasonably controlled at sea as well. Unless I
stumble across an enemy sub (always a risk) I should be free to operate
as I please.

Enemy air activity seems greatly reduced for the moment (although
damaged planes may be returning to service now). NATO may try more of
the 4-plane raids from Greece, but I should be able to handle those like
before. I think the main risk will be an American night attack from an
unexpected direction. F-111s? A-6s? I doubt we’ll see anything strategic
at work, and the stealth fighters are probably busy in Europe. Cruise
missiles are always a risk when the American navy’s involved, but it’s
probably too late for them to have a significant effect on our landings.
Hitting our airfields and radars now could be damaging, but last night
would have been more critical, I think. Orders are being given for CAP
flights close to our airbases, but given our lack of AWACS we probably
won’t have enough warning to stop a determined missile raid. I don’t
plan on any other air operations during the night. I would prefer the
crews to rest.

For tomorrow, the main strike I want to conduct is against the
concentration of Turkish Nike sites and radars on the Izmir area, south
of the Dardenelles. The range is too far for my lesser strike aircraft
in the Ukraine, but I should be able to get in under the SAMs with a
MiG-23 strike from Bulgaria. This will significantly reduce Turkish
radar cover, and eliminate the last air-navigation obstacle in that
region. (I suppose I should really be working on the Greek HAWKs too,
but those are a much tougher target.) Other than some additional attacks
against ground forces (the infantry at Kefken, etc.), I think I have
mostly exhausted my target set.

Aaaand, done!

**FEB 15**

Patrols continued uneventfully throughout the night, and no new enemy
contacts were spotted. Ground commanders reported that their areas of
operation were secure. Shortly after dawn the commander is issued new
orders, and proceeds to the next theatre of operations, leaving landing
area security in the hands of capable local commanders. (At this point,
with no sign of further activity I paused the scenario. Looking on the
enemy side, it was clear there would be no further activity based on my
current position and plans, so I brought the scenario to an end.)

**OBSERVATIONS**

(This is mostly based on the V1.3, which I played.)

**Overall Play Experience**

This is another big scenario, and I really liked how the I kept having
to switch focus as different priorities came to the fore. First the
minelaying, then the initial air strike, then naval activity, back to
ongoing air combat, pre-landing reconnaissance, planning the next round
of strikes, directing air and naval landings, etc. etc. There was plenty
of work to do, and enough time and scope for the player to have a range
of different plausible options to explore. You definitely do not feel
railroaded into a pre-defined plan by this scenario, and there’s plenty
of opportunity for a concentration in one area (bomb the shore
defences!) to leave you exposed in another (what do you mean we never
bombed Eskisehir!). Your decisions make a significant difference, which
is great.

I think the Coup comes across to the player the same way as it would to
a real commander; as an occasional operational distraction from a
different sphere of activity, that can't quite be ignored when it
intrudes into a focused military operation.

I had the random events at their lowest setting, so there wasn't a lot
of activity for me. I had one explosion at Murted, a bit of troop
movement, the sub defection, and a couple of cases of Turkish aircraft
doing odd things. The series of coup messages were read quickly, but
there didn't seem to be much I could do about them or with their
information, so I was quickly back to the main operation.

The important thing the coup does is help lend plausibility to the
entire operation. I really doubt the Russians would be able to seize the
Bosporus from a unified and alert Turkey. They can take the seas, and
contest the skies, but I think the Turks would have the ground power to
overwhelm the invaders before too long. But if there's a paralyzing coup
going on, nobody's in charge, and confusion is the word of the day, then
I can start to see a way it might work. So I think it's important to
keep this in the player's mind.

Perhaps the player would feel more involved in the coup progress, if it
were somehow tied in with their own progress? Perhaps something like a
series of report options tied to the player's score? (For example, Low
score = "angered by your attack, thousands of angry Turks are flocking
to their units", High score = "your rapid progress is causing more
confusion, mobilization is is slow".) Perhaps this could be tied to
threats of a major military unit on the way if the player's doing
poorly? But it might be more effort than it is worth, just to add some
extra atmosphere
