<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig23\image1.jpeg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.31528in" />

[**MiG-23 and MiG-27
‘Flogger’**](http://www.airvectors.net/avmig23.html)The MiG-23 Flogger
is a mainstay in the Soviet Air Forces, primarily in the VVS (Frontal
Aviation) but also in the PVO (Air Defence Forces), it is not used by
the Naval Aviation Forces. Over 5000 aircraft were produced by 1985 and
it was widely exported to almost every Soviet aligned country in the
world with the two largest users being Syria and India. Further, there
were over 1000 ground attack
[MiG-27s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikoyan_MiG-27) built, and many
of these were also exported.

The Flogger is considered a ‘3<sup>rd</sup> Generation’ fighter, of an
age and ability equivalent to the American F-4 Phantom or French Mirage
F.1 or Mirage III. It is a variable geometry fighter with a ‘look
down/shoot down) capability. Later versions tended to specialize into
the Air Defence or Ground Attack role which culminated in the MiG-27, so
this is not a true multirole aircraft, but more of an aircraft which
could conduct multiple tasks.

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig23\image2.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.30069in" />

There are a bewildering array of variants and types which are all
considered MiG-23 ‘Floggers’, for ease of categorization I’ll list them
in line with the NATO identification:

**Flogger A**: Consisting of four variants which include prototype and
early production models. Less than 200 were built all told and they
considered a cumbersome disappointment, all were withdrawn from front
line service by 1978.

**Flogger B/E**: With a much improved engine and a new wing as well as
numerous other improvements, the MiG-23M, ‘MF’ and ‘MS’ types were
becoming useful. Now able to engage targets Beyond Visible Range (BVR)
with radar controlled R-23R (AA-7 Apex) missiles. The ‘MF’ was an export
version with downgraded avionics and radar function for Warsaw Pact
allies, even more downgraded for Cuba, India and Syria. Finally the ‘MS’
with even more downgrades was provided to other African and Middle
Eastern counties and were known as the Flogger E. In total about 1300 of
these were built with about 500 remaining in Soviet service, almost all
in reserve status.

**Flogger C**: This was a two seat training version, initially built as
the MiG-23U, then with an improved engine the new built and upgraded ‘U’
variants were called the MiG-23UB. There were 769 built including
exports.

**Flogger D/F/H**: The initial ground attack variant which eventually
became the MiG-27 focused on air to ground ordinance. The MiG-23B
(Flogger F) had a limited production run of 24, the MiG-23BK and ‘BN’
(Flogger H) were export versions with about 100 of the 624 aircraft used
by the Soviets and the rest exported. The main bombe version used by the
VVS was the MiG-27 Flogger D, initially introduced as the ‘BM’ version
of the base airframe. There were 360 MiG-27 built in the mid-1970s but
these were all upgraded to the Flogger J.

**Flogger G**: The next evolution was a specialized air defence variant.
For the PVO this was the MiG-23P and they obtained about 500 of them.
The VVS used the ‘ML’ and ‘MLA’ versions – of the 1100 built, about 200
were exported in two different versions of downgrade and 800 were
upgraded to ‘MLD’ versions (Flogger K, below). Historically only 560
were upgraded but an additional push was made in Northern Fury.

**Flogger J**: This is a baseline MiG-27 with a substantially upgraded
avionics suite, a laser designator and camera targeting system for using
precision guided munitions (PGM). This version was the MiG-27K (Flogger
J2) and 200 were built. The actual Flogger J was a derivative of the ‘K’
version, the MiG-27M and 162 of these were built. All 360 of the
previously built MiG-27s were upgraded to the ‘M’ standard as the
MiG-27D. The MiG-27 ML was an export version provided to India. In total
then, the Soviet VVS operated 722 Flogger J.

**Flogger K**: The definitive fighter variant of the MiG-23, it has
improved maneuverability, is stronger, has improved avionics, a better
radar, more and better defensive measures and able to use better air to
air missiles. This Flogger cannot match an F-15 but will give F-16s,
Mirage-2000s and Tornados a hard time. 800 MiG-23ML/MLA versions were
upgraded to this standard (as opposed to the 560 that were modernized
historically).

|           |               | VVS  | PVO | Reserve | Remarks            |
|-----------|---------------|------|-----|---------|--------------------|
| Flogger A | MiG-23        |      |     | 200     |                    |
| Flogger B | MiG-23M/MF/MS | 100  |     | 400     |                    |
| Flogger C | MiG-23UB      | 400  | 300 |         | Remainder exported |
| Flogger H | MiG-23B/BK/BN | 124  |     | 24      |                    |
| Flogger G | MiG-23P       |      | 500 |         |                    |
|           | MiG-23ML/MLA  | 100  |     |         |                    |
| Flogger J | MiG-27K       | 200  |     |         |                    |
|           | MiG-27M       | 162  |     |         |                    |
|           | MiG-27D       | 360  |     |         |                    |
| Flogger K | MiG-23MLD     | 800  |     |         | Increase for NF    |
| Totals    |               | 1622 | 800 | 624     |                    |

<img src="/assets\images\warsaw\su\air\mig23\image3.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" />
