**French Army**

Although France is not part of the NATO military alliance, its forces
are earmarked to reinforce NATO, and although they are not integrated as
other NATO counties are, there is an understanding of commitment. In
Northern Fury, France Declares itself a full NATO partner within hours
of the war starting and the Armed Forces of France come under the NATO
military command structure.

The French Army is large, 296,000 active and over 400,000 reserve
soldiers. It is however, organized quite differently from most NATO
nations. Brigade HQs have been removed and units report directly to the
Division HQ, also most divisions are about half the strength of their
NATO counterparts and the ‘Light Armoured’ Divisions are about the size
of a typical NATO Brigade. 1<sup>st</sup> French Army is assigned to
deploy to Germany as part of CENTAG (Central Army Group) while the Force
d’Action Rapide will deploy to NORTHAG (Northern Army Group). In
addition to these deployable forces, there are six Territorial Defence
Regions with assigned troops, the Gendarmerie (para military police
force), the French Foreign Legion (mostly in central and northern
Africa) and forces overseas in former colonies throughout Africa,
Djbouti, Reunion Islands, the French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Caribbean
and supporting Coalition operations in the Persian Gulf.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image1.png" style="width:6.71389in;height:5.30694in" />

**Leclerc**

The French Army was in the initial stages of re-equipping its forces
with this new Main Battle Tank (MBT) when Northern Fury occurs. This
tank with very modern fire control, advanced armour and a 120mm gun was
easily the equivalent of the M1A2 or the Leopard 2 in many respects,
probably superior in some areas, and certainly a match for anything the
Soviet forces had available at the time. Production commenced in 1992,
with the first unit equipped by the end of 1993. Within 2e Régiment de
Chasseurs, part of 10<sup>th</sup> Armoured Division is equipped with 80
of these new tanks, while further production continues at an increased
pace.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image2.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.325in" />

**AMX 30**

The standard MBT of the French Army, 1,355 of the original AMX 30 were
accepted into service and in the 80’s and early 90’s the final 271
production tanks and 820 conversions (as originally planned and more
than historic) were to the AMX 30 B2 standard with an improved fire
control system, and a better engine. The non-stabilized 105mm gun puts
this in an equivalent class to the American M60A1 or the Soviet T-62 – a
good tank but not in the same league as the latest NATO or WP
competitors. Many variants were produced, including an Air Defence
version with Roland missiles, a Self Propelled Gun, engineering variants
and even 44 ‘Pluton’ tactical nuclear missile launchers.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image3.jpg" style="width:6.5in;height:4.09653in" />

**Armoured Cars**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image4.jpg" style="width:3.09853in;height:2.42917in" />

The French Army had various armoured cars for divers usage, mostly in
the Light Armoured Divisions and reconnaissance roles. Over 425 AML-60
remained in service from an original procurement of over 3000, although
there were several hundred in reserve. These are used in a
reconnaissance role in most divisions and in the Foreign Legion but also
provided the basis of a complete family of vehicles with many
variations. The French Gendarmerie also use over one hundred examples of
this vehicle.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image5.jpeg" style="width:3.64573in;height:2.42153in" />

One of the more prolific variants of the AML was the AML-90 with a 90mm
low velocity gun (short recoil). The Army uses 210 of these variants in
the Light Armoured Divisions, reconnaissance units and for specialized
units in other divisions. The Gendarmerie and Foreign Legion also uses
this type.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image6.jpg" style="width:3.81181in;height:2.48333in" />

A more modern vehicle was needed to replace the AML-90 and in the early
80’s the ERC-90 was produced. Also with a 90mm gun but this was a
smooth-bore cannon which allowed the firing of improved Armour-Piercing,
Fin-Stabilized, discarding Sabot (APFSDS) ammunition. This improvement
enabled a much better capacity to destroy older type Soviet tanks and
other armoured vehicles out to a range of 2000 meters. Only 192 of these
armoured cars entered service with the Marines, Airborne and Alpine
divisions.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image7.jpg" style="width:3.83819in;height:2.55833in" />

A more effective vehicle to support light forces is found in the
AMX-10RC, which is a heavier 6-wheeled armoured car with a 105mm medium
velocity gun. 284 of these vehicles can be round in the tank destroyer
and reconnaissance roles in light armoured divisions, mechanized
divisions, 9<sup>th</sup> Marine division and the Foreign Legion. The
very capable gun is designed to be fired from light vehicles such as
this and with specialized ammunition can penetrated the side of a Soviet
MBT at 2000 meters. The hydropneumatic suspension is adaptive and allows
for both high speeds and a low profile when needed.

**Armoured Personnel Carriers (APC)**

Like most French vehicles, their APCs were all French designed and
built, with a mind for the export market. Also these vehicles were
spawned many variations. The tracked APC (AMX-10P) had 15 different
variants fielded while the wheeled APC (VAB) developed a staggering 35
variants from a riot control vehicle to Milan and HOT ATGM (Anti-Tank
Guided Missile) launcher. All examples of these two vehicle families had
NBC (Nuclear, Biological, Chemical) protection and were amphibious.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image8.jpg" style="width:3.77083in;height:2.51389in" />

The tracked AMX-10P was used primarily in the mechanized infantry units
of the heavy armoured divisions and their supporting artillery
observers. Over 1500 of the base model with a 20mm autocannon were
delivered as well as ambulance, recovery, ATGM, artillery observer,
radar, mortar and mortar tractors, command, and cargo variants.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image9.jpg" style="width:4.26042in;height:2.83637in" />

The wheeled counterpart to the AMX-10 is the VAB (Véhicule de l’Avant
Blindé or Vanguard Armoured Vehicle). This was the most numerous APC in
the French Army by a long margin with over 4000 in the inventory and
over 1000 more produced for export. These are built in both a 4-wheel
and 6-wheel configuration but the vast majority in French service are
the 4-wheeled variety. This vehicle is amphibious, lightly armoured and
armed and extremely versatile. Every division has at least one unit
equipped with the VAB and dozens of variants are in use throughout the
force.

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image10.jpg" style="width:4.33in;height:3.15in" />

VAB firing a HOT Anti-Tank Guided Missile.

**Artillery**

<img src="/assets\images\nato\fr\army\image11.jpg" style="width:4.90625in;height:2.57738in" />

The French produced GCT was a 155mm howitzer built on an AMX 30 chassis.
The gun provided NBC protection, and auto-loader enabling a rate of fire
of 6-8 rounds per minute out to a range of 23,500 meters. Using rocket
assisted projectiles the range increased to 28,000 meters. By 1994, 253
GCTs were in service, replacing most of the old and unprotected Mk3 guns
produced in the 50’s.

Numerous older 155mm and 105mm artillery systems were in use in various
roles within the French army.
